 I N T R O D U C T I O N Could we classify the luxuriant growth of objects as we do a flora or fauna, complete with tropical and glacial species, sudden mutations, and varieties threat- ened by extinction? Our urban civilization is witness to an ever-accelerating procession of generations of products, appliances and gadgets by comparison with which mankind appears to be a remarkably stable species. This pullulation of objects is no odder, when we come to think about it, than that to be observed in countless natural species. Species which man has successfully inventoried. And in the period when he began to do this systematically he was also able to draw up, in the Encyclopédie, an exhaustive catalogue of the practical and technical objects that surrounded him. Since then, however, that balance has been lost: everyday objects (we are not concerned here with machines) proliferate, needs multiply, production speeds up the life-span of such objects - yet we lack the vocabulary to name them all. How can we hope to classify a world of objects that changes before our eyes and arrive at an adequate system of description? There are almost as many criteria of classification as there are objects themselves: the size of the object; its degree of functionality (i.e. the object's relationship to its own objective function); the gestures associated with it (are they rich or impov- erished? traditional or not?); its form; its duration; the time of day at which it 3 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S appears (more or less intermittent presence, and how conscious one is of it); the material that it transforms (obvious in the case of a coffee grinder, less so in those of a mirror, a radio, or a car - though every object transforms something); the degree of exclusiveness or sociability attendant upon its use (is it for private, family, public or general use?); and so on. Indeed all such means of categoriza- tion may seem - when they are applied to an ensemble, such as the set of objects, that is undergoing continual mutation and expansion - barely less contingent than the order of the letters of the alphabet. The catalogue of the Manufacture d'Armes de Saint-Etienne proposes, if not structures, then at least subdivisions, but it takes into account only objects defined according to function: each object corresponds to an operation, often a tiny or hétéroclite operation, but nowhere is any system of meanings even touched upon.1 At a much higher level, the simultaneously formal, functional and structural analysis which Siegfried Giedion offers us - a kind of epic history of the technical object2 - notes the changes in social structure associated with technical development, but scarcely addresses such questions as how objects are experienced, what needs other than functional ones they answer, what mental structures are interwoven with - and contradict - their functional structures, or what cultural, infracultural or transcultural system underpins their directly experienced everydayness. These are the questions we shall be asking here. We shall not, therefore, be concerning ourselves with objects as defined by their functions or by the categories into which they might be sub- divided for analytic purposes, but instead with the processes whereby people relate to them and with the systems of human behaviour and relationships that result therefrom. The study of this 'spoken' system of objects - that is, the study of the more or less consistent system of meanings that objects institute - always presupposes 1. The catalogue itself, however - its actual existence - is rich in meaning: its exhaustive nomenclatural aims have the resounding cultural implication that access to objects may be obtained only via the pages of a catalogue which may be leafed through 'for the pleasure of if, as one might a great manual, a book of tales, a m e n u . . . . 2. Mechanization Takes Command (New York: Oxford University Press, 1948). 4 I N T R O D U C T I O N a plane distinct from this 'spoken' system, a more strictly structured plane, a structural plane transcending even the functional account of objects. This plane is the technological one. The technological plane is an abstraction: in ordinary life we are practically unconscious of the technological reality of objects. Yet this abstraction is profoundly real: it is what governs all radical transformations of our environment. It is even - and I do not mean this in any paradoxical sense - the most concrete aspect of the object, for technological development is synonymous with objective structural evolution. In the strictest sense, what happens to the object in the technological sphere is essential, whereas what happens to it in the psychological or sociological sphere of needs and practices is inessential. The discourse of psychology or sociology continually refers us to the object as apprehended at a more consistent level, a level unrelated to any individual or collective discourse, namely the supposed level of technological language. It is starting from this language, from this consistency of the technical model, that we can reach an understanding of what happens to objects by virtue of their being produced and consumed, possessed and personalized. It is imperative, therefore, to get a clear picture from the outset of the rationality of the object - a clear picture, that is, of the objective technological structure involved. Take, for example, Gilbert Simondon's account of the petrol engine: In today's engines each important part is so closely associated with the others by reciprocal exchanges of energy that it cannot undergo any essential variation whatsoever. . . . The form of the cylinder head, the metal of which it is manufactured, works in combination with all the other elements of the cycle to produce a particular temperature in the electrodes of the sparking- plug; this temperature in turn affects the characteristics of the ignition and of the cycle as a whole. Modern engines are concrete, whereas earlier ones were abstract. In the older version, each component intervened at a specific stage of the cycle and was then supposed to have no further impact on the others; motor parts 5 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S were rather like people, each doing their job without ever getting acquainted with their co-workers. . . . The technical object may thus be said to have a primitive form, an abstract form, in which each theoretical and material unit is treated as an absolute needing to be set up as a closed system if it is to function properly. Such a situation presents a set of problems of integration that have to be resolved. . . . This is the point at which specific structures emerge which, relative to each component, one might call defence mechan- isms: for instance, the cylinder head of the internal-combustion heat engine starts to bristle with cooling fins. These were at first simply an extraneous element, as it were, added to the cylinder and the cylinder head for the sole purpose of cooling. In more recent engines, however, these fins have come to play a mechanical role as well by providing a ribbing that serves to inhibit the distortion of the cylinder head under the pressure of gases. . . . Now the two functions are no longer distinguishable; a unique structure has thus evolved, one which is not a compromise but a concomitance, a convergence. The ribbed cylinder head may now be made thinner, which allows for faster cooling. The bivalent fin/rib structure therefore fulfils the two formerly separate functions by means of a synthesis - and the result is far more satisfactory in both cases: it integrates the two functions and transcends them. . . . We may say, then, that the new structure is more concrete than the old and that it represents a genuine advance for the technical object, for the true technological problem is the need for a con- vergence of functions within a single structural feature, not the need for a compromise between conflicting requirements. Ultimately, this progression from abstract to concrete means that the technical object will tend towards the state of a system that is completely internally consistent and completely unified.3 3. Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques (Paris: Aubier, 1958), pp. 25-6. 6 I N T R O D U C T I O N This analysis is invaluable, because it supplies us with the elements of a coherent system that is never directly experienced, never apprehended at the practical level. Technology gives us a rigorous account of objects in which functional antagonisms are dialectically resolved into larger structures. Every transition from a system to another, better-integrated system, every commutation within an already structured system, every functional synthesis, precipitates the emergence of a meaning, an objective pertinence that is independent of the individuals who are destined to put it into operation; we are in effect at the level of a language here, and, by analogy with linguistic phenomena, those simple technical elements - different from real objects - upon whose interplay technological evolution is founded might well be dubbed 'technemes'. It is quite possible to envision a science of structural technology working at this level that would study the organization of such technemes into more complex technical objects. This science could be strictly applied, however, only to a limited number of areas, ranging from laboratory research to the massive technological products of the aeronautics, astronautics, shipbuilding, heavy-vehicle or heavy- machinery industries. These are precisely the areas where technical pressures maximize structural constraints, where the collective and impersonal nature of the product reduces the effects of fashion to a minimum. Whereas car makers must continually explore every conceivable variation in the form of their product, while meeting a very few basic technological requirements (water cooling, cylinder-based engine, etc.), aircraft manufacturers are obliged to produce concrete technical objects solely on the basis of simple functional imperatives (safety, speed, efficiency, and so on). Here technological development follows an almost pure course. So, if we want to account for the system of everyday objects, a structural technological analysis is clearly inadequate. We may dream of arriving at an exhaustive description of technemes and their semantic relations that would cover the entire world of real objects, but this must inevitably remain just that - a dream. It is therefore tempting to deal with technemes just as Plato would have us deal, as true astronomers, with the stars: Tf we mean, then, to turn the soul's native intelligence to its proper use by a genuine study of astronomy, we shall proceed, as we do in geometry, by means of problems, 7 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S and leave the starry heavens alone/4 Unfortunately, this impulse immediately runs into the directly experienced psychological and sociological reality of objects, a reality which, over and above objects' perceptible materiality, constitutes such a significant body of constraints that the integrity of the technological system is continually being modified and disturbed by it. It is this disturbance, and the way the rationality of objects comes to grips with the irrationality of needs, and the way this contradiction gives rise to a system of meanings that seeks to resolve it - it is these things that we are concerned with here, not technological models, even if the essential truth of these models provides the ground from which our direct experience of objects is continually emerging. Each of our practical objects is related to one or more structural elements, but at the same time they are all in perpetual flight from technical structure towards their secondary meanings, from the technological system towards a cultural system. The everyday environment remains to a very great extent an 'abstract7 system. For all their multiplicity, objects are generally isolated as to their function, and it is the user who is responsible, as his needs dictate, for their coexistence in a functional context, in a system which is not very economical, not very consistent, and indeed resembles the archaic structure of early petrol engines in that it comprises an assort- ment of partial functions that are often irrelevant or antagonistic to one another. The current trend, moreover, is by no means to rectify this inconsistency but, rather, to meet successive needs by introducing new objects. The result is that each object added to the sum of objects may be adequate to its own function but work against the whole; it even happens that a new object will be adequate to its function while at the same time working against it. Furthermore, inasmuch as an object's formal and technical connotations are added to a functional incoherence, it is the whole system of needs, socialized or unconscious, cultural or practical - in short, a whole inessential system, directly experienced - which surges back on to the essential technical order and threatens the objective status of the object itself. 4. The Republic of Plato, trans F.M. Cornford (New York and London: Oxford University Press, 1945 [1941]), Book VII, pp. 248-9. 8 I N T R O D U C T I O N To take an example: the most 'essential' and structural aspects of a coffee mill, and hence the most concretely objective things about it, are the electric motor, the electricity furnished by the power company, and the laws governing the production and transformation of energy; what is already less objective, because it depends on a particular person's need, is the mill's actual coffee-grinding function; and what is not objective in the slightest, and hence inessential, is whether it is green and rectangular or pink and trapezoid. A single structure, the electric motor, may be embodied in a variety of specific functions; functional differentiation is thus already a secondary consideration (and may eventually fall into the sheer incoherence of the completely useless object or 'gadget'5). A single function of an object may in turn become specific in a variety of forms - which brings us into that realm of 'personalization', of formal connotation, where the inessential holds sway. Indeed, the characteristic of the industrial object which distinguishes it from the craft object is that in the former the inessential is no longer left to the whims of individual demand and manufacture, but instead picked up and systematized by the production process, which today defines its aims by reference to what is inessential (and by reference to the universal combinatorial system of fashion).6 This inextricable complexity is what makes for the fact that the conditions under which a technological sphere may become autonomous, and therefore the possibility of a structural analysis in the realm of objects, are not comparable to the situation with regard to language. Apart from pure technical objects, with which as subjects we never have anything to do, we shall see that the two levels of objective denotation and of connotation (whereby the object is cathected, commercialized and personalized, whereby it attains utility and enters into a 5. [Translator's note: French, in borrowing the English word 'gadget', lays far more stress than English-speakers generally do on the connotation for which a gadget is an object, such as a novelty item, with no function or use value. It is with this emphasis that the author uses the term here and throughout the present work; see in particular his discussion of gadgets and robots below.] 6. The modalities of transition from essential to inessential are thus today themselves relatively systematic. This systematization of the inessential has its sociological and psychological aspects; it also has an ideological function of integration (see 'Models and Series' below). 9 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S cultural system) are not, under today's conditions of production and consumption, separable in the way that the levels of language [langue] and speech [parole] are separable in linguistics. The technological level simply does not have the sort of structural autonomy that would permit us to say that its equivalent of 'speech acts7, namely the 'speaking' object, is no more important in an analysis of objects than speech acts are in an analysis of linguistic phenomena. Whereas a rolled r in contrast to a uvular r changes nothing so far as the linguistic system is concerned - in other words, the connoted meaning has absolutely no retroactive effect on the denoted structures - the connotation of an object may for its part bring great weight to bear upon technical structures, and alter them significantly. For technology, unlike language, does not constitute a stable system. Unlike monemes and phonemes, technemes are continually evolving. Now, the fact that the technological system is so closely implicated, by reason of its state of permanent revolution, in the very time of the practical objects that 'speak' it (much the same is true for language, but to a vastly lesser degree); the fact that this system has as its aims a mastery of the world and the satisfaction of needs - aims, that is to say, which are more concrete and less easily dissociated from praxis than communication, which is the aim of language; and, lastly, the fact that technology depends strictly on the social conditions under which technological research is carried out, and hence on the global order of production and consumption, an external constraint which in no way applies to language - all this means that the system of objects, unlike the linguistic system, cannot be described scientifically unless it is treated in the process as the result of the continual intrusion of a system of practices into a system of techniques. It is thus not consistent technical structures but, rather, the ways in which practices affect techniques - or, more exactly, the ways in which techniques are checked by practices - that account for reality here. In sum, the description of the system of objects cannot be divorced from a critique of that system's practical ideology. At the technological level there is no contradiction: there is merely intention. But a human science must be a science both of intention and of whatever counters that intention. How is it that a consistent technological system is dissemi- nated as an inconsistent practical system? How is the 'language' of objects 'spoken'? By what means does this 'speech' system (or this system which falls somewhere 10 I N T R O D U C T I O N between language and speech) override the linguistic system? And finally, what is the location, not of the abstract consistency of the system of objects but, rather, of its directly experienced contradictions?7 7. On the basis of this distinction, it is nevertheless possible to posit a close affinity between the analysis of objects on the one hand and linguistics (or, more precisely, semiology) on the other. Thus what I refer to in the field of objects as marginal (or inessential) difference is analogous to the semiological notion of 'field of dispersal'. This field is made up of the varieties in execution of a unit (of a phoneme, for instance) as long as these varieties do not result in an alteration in meaning (that is, as long as they do not become pertinent variations)... : in the food system, for instance, we can speak of the dispersal field of a dish, which will be established by the limits within which this dish's name still signifies, whatever 'frills' preparers may add. . . . The varieties which make u p the dispersal field are called combinative variants.... [These] do not participate in commutations of meaning; they are not pertinent... . Combinative variants have long been considered as phenomena pertaining to speech: they certainly are very close to it, but are nowadays held to pertain to language, since they are 'compulsory'. (Roland Barthes, 'Eléments de sémiologie', Communications, no. 4 [November 1964], p. 128. English translation by Annette Lavers and Colin Smith: Elements of Semiology [London: Jonathan Cape, 1967], pp. 84-5 [here slightly modified].) Uarthes adds that this notion is destined to become a central one in semiology, because variations of this kind, though they are non-signifying at the denotative level, may again become significant at the level of connotation. Clearly the analogy between combinative variation and marginal difference is a profound one: both involve the inessential, both are without pertinence, both depend on a combinatorial system and become meaningful at the level of connotation. There is an essential difference between them, however: combinative variation remains external to the semiological plane of denotation, whereas marginal difference is, precisely, never 'marginal'. For the technological plane does not designate - as language qua system [langue] does for language in general [langage] - a fixed methodological abstraction which reaches the real world only by virtue oi connotations; rather, it designates an evolving structural framework which connotations (inessential differences) arrest, stereotype and cause to regress. Technology's structural dynamism is paralysed, at the Irvel of objects, in the differential subjectivity of the cultural system, which itself then retroactively impinges on the organization of technology. 11 A . T H E F U N C T I O N A L S Y S T E M , O R O B J E C T I V E D I S C O U R S E I Structures of Interior Design The Traditional Environment The arrangement of furniture offers a faithful image of the familial and social structures of a period. The typical bourgeois interior is patriarchal; its foundation is the dining-room/bedroom combination. Although it is diversified with respect to function, the furniture is highly integrated, centring around the sideboard or the bed in the middle of the room. There is a tendency to accumulate, to fill and close off the space. The emphasis is on unifunctionality, immovability, imposing presence and hierarchical labelling. Each room has a strictly defined role corresponding to one or another of the various functions of the family unit, and each ultimately refers to a view which conceives of the individual as a balanced assemblage of distinct faculties. The pieces of furniture confront one another, jostle one another, and implicate one another in a unity that is not so much spatial as moral in character. They are ranged about an axis which ensures a regular chronology of actions; thanks to this permanent symbolization, the family is always present to itself. Within this private space each piece of furniture in turn, and each room, inter- nalizes its own particular function and takes on the symbolic dignity pertaining to it - then the whole house puts the finishing touch to this integration of interpersonal relationships within the semi-hermetic family group. 15 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S All this constitutes an organism whose structure is the patriarchal relationship founded on tradition and authority, and whose heart is the complex affective relationship that binds all the family members together. Such a family home is a specific space which takes little account of any objective decorative requirements, because the primary function of furniture and objects here is to personify human relationships, to fill the space that they share between them, and to be inhabited by a soul.1 The real dimension they occupy is captive to the moral dimension which it is their job to signify. They have as little autonomy in this space as the various family members enjoy in society. Human beings and objects are indeed bound together in a collusion in which the objects take on a certain density, an emotional value - what might be called a 'presence'. What gives the houses of our childhood such depth and resonance in memory is clearly this complex structure of interiority, and the objects within it serve for us as boundary markers of the symbolic configu- ration known as home. The caesura between inside and outside, and their formal opposition, which falls under the social sign of property and the psychological sign of the immanence of the family, make this traditional space into a closed transcendence. In their anthropomorphism the objects that furnish it become house- hold gods, spatial incarnations of the emotional bonds and the permanence of the family group. These gods enjoyed a gentle immortality until the advent of a modern generation which has cast them aside, dispersed them - even, on occasion, reinstated them in an up-to-date nostalgia for whatever is old. As often with gods, furniture too thus gets a second chance to exist, and passes from a naïve utility into a cultural baroque. The dining-room/bedroom pattern - an arrangement of movable property closely bound up with the house as immovable property - continues to be widely pitched by advertisers to a vast public. Department stores such as Lévitan and Galeries Barbes still titillate the collective taste with evocations of 'decorative' ensembles - despite the fact that contours are now 'stylized', despite the fact that decoration is out of favour. This furniture still sells, not because it is cheaper but because it embodies the official certainties of the group and enjoys the sanction of 1. They may also have taste and style - or not, as the case may be. 16 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N the bourgeoisie. A further reason is that such monumental furniture (sideboard, bed or wardrobe) and its arrangement echo the persistence of traditional family structures across broad social strata of modern society. The Modern Object Liberated in Its Function The style of furniture changes as the individual's relationships to family and society change. Corner divans and beds, coffee tables, shelving - a plethora of new elements are now supplanting the traditional range of furniture. The organization of space changes, too, as beds become day-beds and sideboards and wardrobes give way to built-in storage. Things fold and unfold, are concealed, appear only when needed. Naturally such innovations are not due to free experiment: for the most part the greater mobility, flexibility and convenience they afford are the result of an involuntary adaptation to a shortage of space - a case of necessity being the mother of invention. Whereas the old-fashioned dining-room was heavily freighted with moral convention, 'modern7 interiors, in their ingeniousness, often give the impression of being mere functional expedients. Their 'absence of style' is in the first place an absence of room, and maximum functionality is a solution of last resort whose outcome is that the dwelling-place, though remaining closed to the outside, loses its internal organization. Such a restructuring of space and the objects in it, unaccompanied by any reconversion, must in the first instance be considered an impoverishment. The modern set of furniture, serially produced, is thus apparently destruc- tured yet not restructured, nothing having replaced the expressive power of the old symbolic order. There is progress, nevertheless: between the individual and these objects, which are now more supple in their uses and have ceased to exercise or symbolize moral constraint, there is a much more liberal relationship, and in particular the individual is no longer strictly defined through them relative to his family.2 Their mobility and multifunctionality allow him to organize them more 2. We cannot help but wonder, however, whether he is not henceforward strictly defined through them relative to society at large. On this point, see 'Models and Series' below. 17 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S freely, and this reflects a greater openness in his social relationships. This, however, is only a partial liberation. So far as the serial object is concerned, in the absence of any restructuring of space, this 'functional' development is merely an emanci- pation, not (to go back to the old Marxian distinction) a liberation proper, for it implies liberation from the function of the object only, not from the object itself Consider a nondescript, light, foldable table or a bed without legs, frame or canopy - an absolute cipher of a bed, one might say: all such objects, with their 'pure' outlines, no longer resemble even what they are; they have been stripped down to their most primitive essence as mere apparatus and, as it were, definitively secularized. What has been liberated in them - and what, in being liberated, has liberated something in man (or rather, perhaps, what man, in liberating himself, has liberated in them) - is their function. The function is no longer obscured by the moral theatricality of the old furniture; it is emancipated now from ritual, from ceremonial, from the entire ideology which used to make our surroundings into an opaque mirror of a reified human structure. Today, at last, these objects emerge absolutely clear about the purposes they serve. They are thus indeed free as functional objects - that is, they have the freedom to function, and (certainly so far as serial objects are concerned) that is practically the only freedom they have.3 Now, just so long as the object is liberated only in its function, man equally is liberated only as user ofthat object. This too is progress, though not a decisive turning- point. A bed is a bed, a chair is a chair, and there is no relationship between them so long as each serves only the function it is supposed to serve. And without such a relationship there can be no space, for space exists only when it is opened up, animated, invested with rhythm and expanded by a correlation between objects and a transcendence of their functions in this new structure. In a way space is the object's true freedom, whereas its function is merely its formal freedom. The 3. Similarly, the bourgeois and industrial revolution gradually freed the individual from his involvement with religion, morality and family. He thus acceded to a freedom in law as an individual, but also to an actual freedom as labour-power - that is, the freedom to sell himself as labour-power. This parallel has nothing coin- cidental about it, for there is a profound correlation here: both the serially produced 'functional' object and the social individual are liberated in their 'functional' objectification, not in their singularity or in their totality as object or person. 18 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N bourgeois dining-room was structured, but its structure was closed. The functional environment is more open, freer, but it is destructured, fragmented into its various functions. Somewhere between the two, in the gap between integrated psycho- logical space and fragmented functional space, serial objects have their being, witnesses to both the one and the other - sometimes within a single interior. The Model Interior Modular Components This elusive space, which is no longer either a confined externality nor an interior refuge, this freedom, this 'style' which is indecipherable in the serial object because it is subordinated to that object's function, may nevertheless be encountered in model interiors, which embody a new emerging structure and a significant evolution.4 Leafing through such glossy magazines as Maison Française or Mobilier et Décoration [Furniture and Decoration],5 one cannot fail to notice two alternating themes. The first reaches for the sublime, presenting houses beyond compare: old eighteenth-century mansions, miraculously well-equipped villas, Italian gardens heated by infra-red rays and populated by Etruscan statuettes - in short, the world of the unique, leaving the reader no alternative (so far as sociological generalization is concerned, at any rate) but contemplation without hope. Aristocratic models such as these, by virtue of their absolute value, are what underpin the second theme, that of modern interior decoration and furnishing. The objects and furniture proposed here, though they are high in 'status' value, do impinge on sociological reality: they are not dream creations without commercial significance but, rather, models in the proper sense of the word. We are no longer in 4. In other words, these things happen at a privileged level. And there is a sociological and a social problem with the fact that a restricted group should have the concrete freedom to present itself, through its objects and furniture, as a model in the eyes of an entire society. This problem will be addressed later, however - see 'Models and Series' below. 5. A glossy magazine devoted to mass-produced products is unthinkable, the only appropriate form here being a catalogue. 19 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S a world of pure art, but in a world which (potentially, at least) is of interest to the whole of society. These models of the home-furnishing avant-garde are organized around the basic distinction between COMPONENTS and SEATING; the practical imperative they obey is that of INTERIOR DESIGN, or syntagmatic calculation, to which may be contrasted, as seats are to components, the general concept of ATMOSPHERE. TECMA: Extensible and interlocking components. Can be transformed or enlarged. Harmonious - they create a perfectly matching set of furniture. Functional - they answer all the needs of modern living. And they meet all your furnishing requirements - bookshelves, bar, radio, cupboards, wardrobe, desk space, cabinets, dresser, drawers, display unit, file storage, hideaway table.... TECMA is available in oiled teak or finished mahogany. OSCAR: Put your OSCAR environment together with your own hands! Exciting! Unprecedented! The OSCAR furniturama is a set of specially pre-cut components. Discover the fun of designing a miniature three-dimensional model of your furniture, in colour and just the right size to handle! You can build your model and change it around to your heart's content - all in the comfort of your own home! Then, with perfect confidence, order your original and personal OSCAR furniture - soon to be the pride of your household! MONOPOLY: Every MONOPOLY ensemble is your personality's best friend. A high-quality cabinetwork system, in teak or makoré. Jointing and assembling leave no traces. Four-sided components can be put together in an infinite variety of ways - an infinite variety of genuine furniture adapted to your own particular tastes, size requirements and needs. These are multi-combinable single-block components. You're sure to want them so that you too can give your home that refined atmosphere you've been dreaming about. 20 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N These examples reveal how the functional object is being transcended by a new kind of practical organization. Symbolic values, and along with them use values, are being supplanted by organizational values. The substance and form of the old furniture have been abandoned for good, in favour of an extremely free interplay of functions. These objects are no longer endowed with a 'soul', nor do they invade us with their symbolic presence: the relationship has become an objective one, founded on disposition and play. The value this relationship takes on is no longer of an instinctive or a psychological but, rather, of a tactical kind. What such objects embody is no longer the secret of a unique relationship but, rather, differences, and moves in a game. The former radical closure has disappeared, in parallel with a distinct change in social and interpersonal structures. Walls and Daylight The rooms and the house themselves now transcend the traditional dividing-line of the wall, which formerly made them into spaces of refuge. Rooms open into one another, everything communicates, and space is broken up into angles, diffuse areas and mobile sectors. Rooms, in short, have been liberalized. Windows are no longer imposed upon the free influx of air and light - a light which used to come from outside and settle upon objects, illuminating them as though from within. Now there are quite simply no windows, and a freely intervening light has become a universal function of the existence of things. In the same way objects have lost the substantiality which was their basis, the form which enclosed them whereby man made them part of his self-image: it is now space which plays freely between them, and becomes the universal function of their relationships and their 'values'. Lighting Many significant features of this general evolution might be pointed out. The tendency for light sources to be made invisible is a case in point. 'A recessed ceiling conceals perimeter neon fixtures for general diffuse lighting/ 'Uniform lighting is ensured by neon tubes concealed in various places: the full length of the recessed 21 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S ceiling above the curtains, behind and all along the top rim of the built-in units, beneath the upper row of cupboards, etc/ Everything suggests that the source of light continues to be evocative of the origin of all things: even though it no longer illuminates the family circle from the ceiling, even though it has been dispersed and made manifold, it is apparently still the sign of a privileged intimacy, still able to invest things with unique value, to create shadows and invent presences. Small wonder that a system founded on the objective manipulation of simple and homogeneous elements should strive to eliminate this last sign of internal radiance, of the symbolic envelopment of things by look or desire. Mirrors and Portraits Another symptomatic change is the disappearance of looking-glasses and mirrors. A psycho-sociology of the mirror is overdue, especially in the wake of so much metaphysics. The traditional peasant milieu had no mirrors, perhaps even feared them as somewhat eerie. The bourgeois interior, by contrast, and what remains of that interior in present-day serially produced furniture, has mirrors in profusion, hung on the walls and incorporated into wardrobes, sideboards, cabinets or panelling. As a source of light, the mirror enjoys a special place in the room. This is the basis of the ideological role it has played, everywhere in the domestic world of the well-to-do, as redundancy, superfluity, reflection: the mirror is an opulent object which affords the self-indulgent bourgeois individual the opportunity to exercise his privilege - to reproduce his own image and revel in his possessions. In a more general sense we may say that the mirror is a symbolic object which not only reflects the characteristics of the individual but also echoes in its expansion the historical expansion of individual consciousness. It thus carries the stamp of approval of an entire social order: it is no coincidence that the century of Louis XIV is epitomized by the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles, nor that, in more recent times, the spread of mirrors in apartments coincided with the spread of the triumphal Pharisaism of bourgeois consciousness, from Napoleon III to Art Nouveau. But things have changed. There is no place in the functional ensemble for reflection for its own sake. The mirror still exists, but its most appropriate place is in the 22 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N bathroom, unframed. There, dedicated to the fastidious care of the appearance that social intercourse demands, it is liberated from the graces and glories of domestic subjectivity. By the same token other objects are in turn liberated from mirrors; hence, they are no longer tempted to exist in a closed circuit with their own images. For mirrors close off space, presuppose a wall, refer back to the centre of the room. The more mirrors there are, the more glorious is the intimacy of the room, albeit more turned in upon itself. The current proliferation of openings and transparent partitions clearly represents a diametrically opposed approach. (Furthermore, all the tricks that mirrors make possible run counter to the current demand for a frank use of materials.) A chain has definitely been broken, and there is a real logic to the modern approach when it eliminates not only central or over-visible light sources but also the mirrors that used to reflect them; by thus eschewing any focus on or return to a central point, it frees space of the converging squint which gave bourgeois décor - much like bourgeois consciousness in general - such a cross- eyed view of itself.6 Something else, too, has disappeared in tandem with mirrors: the family portrait, the wedding photograph in the bedroom, the full-length or half-length portrait of the master of the house in the drawing-room, the framed close-ups of the children almost everywhere. All these, constituting a sort of diachronic mirror of the family, disappear along with mirrors themselves when a certain level of modernity is reached (although this has not happened as yet on any wide scale). Even works of art, whether originals or reproductions, no longer have a part to play as an absolute value, but merely in a combining mode. The success of prints as decoration in contrast to framed pictures is in part to be explained by their lower absolute value, and hence greater value in association. No object, any more than lights and mirrors, must be allowed to regain too intense a focus. 6. The mirror occasionally makes a comeback, but it does so in a baroque cultural mode, as a secondary object - a romantic looking-glass, say, or an antique or bull's-eye mirror. The function is no longer the same (and will be addressed below apropos of antiques in general). 23 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Clocks and Time Another illusion forsworn by the modern interior is the illusion of time. An essential object has vanished: the clock. It is worth recalling that although the centre of the peasant room is the fire and fireplace, the clock is nevertheless a majestic and living element therein. In the bourgeois or petty-bourgeois interior it takes the form of the clock that so often crowns the marble mantelpiece, itself usually dominated by a mirror above - the whole ensemble constituting the most extra- ordinary symbolic resume of bourgeois domesticity. The clock is to time as the mirror is to space. Just as the relationship to the reflected image institutes a closure and a kind of introjection of space, so the clock stands paradoxically for the permanence and introjection of time. Country clocks are among the most sought- after of objects, precisely because they capture time and strip it of surprises within the intimacy of a piece of furniture. There is nothing in the world more reassuring. The measuring of time produces anxiety when it serves to assign us to social tasks, but it makes us feel safe when it substantializes time and cuts it into slices like an object of consumption. Everybody knows from experience how intimate a ticking clock can make a place feel; the reason is that the clock's sound assimilates the place to the inside of our own body. The clock is a mechanical heart that reassures us about our own heart. It is precisely this process of infusion or assimilation of the substance of time, this presence of duration, which is rejected, just like all other returns to inwardness, by a modern order based on externality, spatiality and objective relationships. Towards a Sociology of Interior Design? It is the whole world of Stimmung that has disappeared, the world of 'natural' harmony between movements of the emotions and the presence of things: an internalized atmosphere as opposed to the externalized atmosphere of modern 'interiors'. Today, value resides neither in appropriation nor in intimacy but in information, in inventiveness, in control, in a continual openness to objective messages - in short, in the syntagmatic calculation which is, strictly speaking, the foundation of the discourse of the modern home-dweller. 24 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N The entire conception of decoration has changed too. Traditional good taste, which decided what was beautiful on the basis of secret affinities, no longer has any part here. That taste constituted a poetic discourse, an evocation of self- contained objects that responded to one another; today objects do not respond to one another, they communicate - they have no individual presence but merely, at best, an overall coherence attained by virtue of their simplification as compo- nents of a code and the way their relationships are calculated. An unrestricted combinatorial system enables man to use them as the elements of his structural discourse. Advertising widely promotes this new conception of decoration: 'Create a livable and well-organized three-room flat in 30 square metres!'; 'Multiply your flat by four!' More generally, it always talks of interior decorating in terms of problems and solutions, and it is here, rather than in 'good taste', that the current direction of decoration is to be found: it is no longer a matter of setting up a theatre of objects or creating an ambience, but of solving a problem, devising the subtlest possible response to a complicated set of conditions, mobilizing a space. In the case of serial objects, the possibilities of this functional discourse are reduced. Objects and furniture of this kind are dispersed elements whose syntactic links are not evident; to the degree that they are arranged in a calculated way, the organizing principle is penury, and the objects appear impoverished in their abstraction. This is a necessary abstraction, however, for it provides the basis, at the level of the model, for the homogeneity of the elements in functional interaction. First of all man must stop mixing himself up with things and investing them with his own image; he will then be able, beyond the utility they have for him, to project onto them his game plan, his calculations, his discourse, and invest these manoeuvres themselves with the sense of a message to others, and a message to oneself. By the time this point is reached the mode of existence of 'ambient' objects will have changed completely, and a sociology of furnishing will perforce have given way to a sociology of interior design.7 7. Roland Barthes describes this new stage as it affects cars: . . . the uniformity of models seems to belie the very idea of technical performance, so 'normal7 driving becomes the only possible field in which phantasies of power and invention can be invested. The car thus 25 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Both the images and the discourse of advertising attest to this development: the discourse, by placing the subject directly on the stage as actor and manager, in both the indicative and the imperative moods; the images, to the contrary, by leaving the subject out, for his presence would, in a way, be an anachronism. The subject is himself the order he puts into things, and this order excludes redun- dancy: man has simply to remove himself from the picture. His presence has accomplished its task. What man now creates is a space, not a décor, and whereas the figure of the master of the house was a normal part - indeed, the clearest connotation - of the traditional décor, a signature is thoroughly alien to any 'functional7 space. Man the Interior Designer We are beginning to see what the new model of the home-dweller looks like: 'man the interior designer' is neither an owner nor a mere user - rather, he is an active engineer of atmosphere. Space is at his disposal like a kind of distributed system, and by controlling this space he holds sway over all possible reciprocal relations between the objects therein, and hence over all the roles they are capable of assuming. (It follows that he must also be 'functional' himself: he and the space in question must be homogeneous if his messages of design are to leave him and return to him successfully.) What matters to him is neither possession nor enjoyment but responsibility, in the strict sense which implies that it is at all times possible for him to determine 'responses'. His praxis is exclusively external. This modern home-dweller does not 'consume' his objects. (Here again, 'taste' no longer has the slightest part to play, for in both its meanings it refers us back to self- contained objects whose form contains an 'edible' substance, so to speak, which transfers its phantasied power to a specific set of practices. Since we can no longer tinker with the object itself, we are reduced to tinkering with the way it is driven . . . it is no longer the car's forms and functions that call forth human dreams but, rather, its handling, and before long, perhaps, we shall be writing not a mythology of the automobile but a mythology of driving. ('La voiture, projection de l'ego', Réalités, no. 213, October 1963) 26 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N makes them susceptible of internalization.) Instead of consuming objects, he dominates, controls and orders them. He discovers himself in the manipulation and tactical equilibration of a system. There is clearly something abstract about this model of the 'functional' home- dweller. Advertising would like us to believe that modern man no longer fundamentally needs his objects, that all he has to do now is operate among them as an intelligent technician of communications. Our environment, however, is a directly experienced mode of existence, and it is very abstract indeed to apply to it computational and informational models borrowed from the purely technical realm. Furthermore, this objectivizing approach is accompanied by a cascade of ambiguous phraseology - 'to your own taste', 'to your own measurements', 'personalization', 'the atmosphere will be yours alone', and so forth - which appears to contradict that approach but in fact covers for it. The objective game which man the interior designer is invited to play is invariably taken over by the double-dealing of advertising. Yet the game's very logic conveys with it the image of a general strategy of human relations, the image of a human project, of a modus vivendi for the technical age - a genuine change of civilization whose impact may be discerned even in everyday life. Consider the object for a moment: the object as humble and receptive supporting actor, as a sort of psychological slave or confidant - the object as directly experienced in traditional daily life and illustrated throughout the history of Western art down to our own day. This object was the reflection of a total order, bound up with a well-defined conception of décor and perspective, substance and form. According to this conception, the form is an absolute dividing-line between inside and outside. Form is a rigid container, and within it is substance. Beyond their practical function, therefore, objects - and specifically objects of furniture - have a primordial function as vessels, a function that belongs to the register of the imaginary.8 This explains their psychological receptiveness. They are the 8. A law of dimension also seems to come into play, however, at the level of symbolic organization: any object above a certain size, even one with phallic significance (car, rocket), becomes a receptacle, vessel or womb, while any below a particular size becomes penile, even if it is a bowl or a knick-knack. 27 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S reflection of a whole view of the world according to which each being is a 'vessel of inwardness' and relations between beings are transcendent correlations of substances; thus the house itself is the symbolic equivalent of the human body, whose potent organic schema is later generalized into an ideal design for the integration of social structures. All this makes up a complete mode of life whose basic ordering principle is Nature as the original substance from which value is derived. In creating or manufacturing objects, man makes himself, through the imposition of a form (i.e. through culture), into the transubstantiator of nature. It is the passing down of substances from age to age, from form to form, which supplies the archetype of creativity, namely creation ab utero and the whole poetic and metaphorical symbolic system that goes with it.9 So, with meaning and value deriving from the hereditary transmission of substances under the jurisdiction of form, the world is experienced as given (as it always is in the unconscious and in childhood), and the task is to reveal and perpetuate it. So too, with the form perfectly circumscribing the object, a portion of nature is included therein, just as in the case of the human body: the object on this view is essentially anthropo- morphic. Man is thus bound to the objects around him by the same visceral intimacy, mutatis mutandis, that binds him to the organs of his own body, and 'ownership' of the object always tends virtually towards the appropriation of its substance by oral annexation and 'assimilation'. What we glimpse today in modern interiors is the coming end of this order of Nature; what is appearing on the horizon, beyond the break-up of form, beyond the dissolution of the formal boundary between inside and outside and of the whole dialectic of being and appearance relating to that boundary, is a qualitatively new kind of relationship, a new kind of objective responsibility. As directly experienced, the project of a technological society implies putting the very idea of genesis into question and omitting all the origins, received meanings and 'essences' of which our old pieces of furniture remained concrete symbols; it implies practical computation and conceptualization on the basis of a total abstraction, the 9. Intellectual and artistic production, traditionally seen in terms of gifts, inspiration or genius, has never really been anything more than an echo of this archetype. 28 S T R U C T U R E S O F I N T E R I O R D E S I G N notion of a world no longer given but instead produced - mastered, manipulated, inventoried, controlled: a world, in short, that has to be constructed.10 Although it is different in kind from the traditional procreative order, this modern order nevertheless also depends on a basic symbolic system. Whereas the earlier civilization, founded on the natural order of substances, may be said to have been underpinned by oral structures, the modern order of production, calculation and functionality must be viewed as a phallic order linked to the enterprise whose goal is the supersession and transformation of the given and the opening up of new objective structures; but it is at the same time a faecal order founded on an abstraction or quintessence meant to inform a homogeneous material world, on the measuring off and division of material reality, on a great anal aggressiveness sublimated into play, discourse, ordering, classifying and placement. The organizing of things, even when in the context of technical enterprise it has every appearance of being objective, always remains a powerful springboard for projection and cathexis. The best evidence of this is the obsessiveness that lies behind so many organizational projects and (of most relevance to our present discussion) behind the will to design. Everything has to intercommunicate, everything has to be functional - no more secrets, no more mysteries, everything is organized, therefore everything is clear. This is not the old slogan of the house- proud: a place for everything and everything in its place. That obsession was moral, today's is functional - and explicable in terms of the faecal function, which requires absolute conductivity in all internal organs. Here we have the basis for a character profile of technical civilization: if hypochondria is an obsession with the circulation of substances and the functioning of the primary organs, we might well describe modern man, the cybernetician, as a mental hypochondriac, as someone obsessed with the perfect circulation of messages. 10. As a matter of fact this model of praxis emerges clearly only when a high technical level has been attained, or in the context of very advanced everyday objects, such as tape recorders, cars or household appliances, whose dials, dashboards or control panels bespeak the degree of mastery and coordination required to operate them. It should be noted that everyday life is still very largely governed by the traditional forms of praxis. 29 Il Structures of Atmosphere The term 'interior design' sums up the organizational aspect of the domestic environment, but it does not cover the entire system of the modern living space, which is based on a counterpoint between DESIGN and ATMOSPHERE. In the discourse of advertising the technical need for design is always accompanied by the cultural need for atmosphere. The two structure a single practice; they are two aspects of a single functional system. And both mobilize the values of play and of calculation - calculation of function in the case of design, calculation of materials, forms and space in the case of atmosphere.11 Atmospheric Values: Colour Traditional Colour In the traditional system colours have psychological and moral overtones. A person will 'like' a particular colour, or have 'their' colour. Colour may be dictated by an event, a ceremony, or a social role; alternatively, it may be the characteristic 11. To the extent that arrangement involves dealing with space, it too may be considered a component of atmosphere. 30 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E of a particular material - wood, leather, canvas or paper. Above all it remains circumscribed by form; it does not seek contact with other colours, and it is not a free value. Tradition confines colours to its own parochial meanings and draws the strictest of boundary-lines about them. Even in the freer ceremonial of fashion, colours generally derive their significance from outside themselves: they are simply metaphors for fixed cultural meanings. At the most impoverished level, the symbolism of colours gets lost in mere psychological resonance: red is passionate and aggressive, blue a sign of calm, yellow optimistic, and so on; and by this point the language of colours is little different from the languages of flowers, dreams or the signs of the Zodiac. The traditional treatment of colour negates colour as such, rejects it as a complete value. Indeed, the bourgeois interior reduces it for the most part to discreet 'tints' and 'shades'. Grey, mauve, garnet, beige - all the shades assigned to velours, woollens and satins, to the profusion of fabrics, curtains, carpets and hangings, as also to heavier materials and 'period' forms, imply a moral refusal of both colour and space. But especially of colour, which is deemed too spectacular, and a threat to inwardness. The world of colours is opposed to the world of values, and the 'chic' invariably implies the elimination of appearances in favour of being:12 black, white, grey - whatever registers zero on the colour scale - is corre- spondingly paradigmatic of dignity, repression, and moral standing. 'Natural Colour Colours would not celebrate their release from this anathema until very late. It would be generations before cars and typewriters came in anything but black, and even longer before refrigerators and washbasins broke with their universal whiteness. It was painting that liberated colour, but it still took a very long time for the effects to register in everyday life. The advent of bright red armchairs, sky-blue 12. 'Loud' colours are meant to strike the eye. If you wear a red suit, you are more than naked - you become a pure object with no inward reality. The fact that women's tailored suits tend to be in bright colours is a reflection of the social status of women as objects. 31 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S settees, black tables, multicoloured kitchens, living-rooms in two or three different tones, contrasting inside walls, blue or pink façades (not to mention mauve and black underwear) suggests a liberation stemming from the overthrow of a global order. This liberation, moreover, was contemporary with that of the functional object (with the introduction of synthetic materials, which were polymorphous, and of non-traditional objects, which were polyfunctional). The transition, however, did not go smoothly. Colour that loudly announced itself as such soon began to be perceived as over-aggressive, and before long it was excluded from model forms, whether in clothing or in furnishing, in favour of a somewhat relieved return to discreet tones. There is a kind of obscenity of colour which modernity, after exalting it briefly as it did the explosion of form, seems to end up apprehending in much the same way as it apprehends pure functionality: labour should not be discernible anywhere - neither should instinct be allowed to show its face. The dropping of sharp contrasts and the return to 'natural' colours as opposed to the violence of 'affected' colours reflects this compromise solution at the level of model objects. At the level of serially produced objects, by contrast, bright colour is always apprehended as a sign of emancipation - in fact it often compensates for the absence of more fundamental qualities (particularly a lack of space). The discrimination here is obvious: associated with primary values, with functional objects and synthetic materials, bright, 'vulgar' colours always tend to predominate in the serial interior. They thus partake of the same anonymity as the functional object: having once represented something approaching a liberation, both have now become signs that are merely traps, raising the banner of freedom but delivering none to direct experience. Furthermore - and this is their paradox - such straightforward and 'natural' colours turn out to be neither. They turn out to be nothing but an impossible echo of the state of nature, which explains why they are so aggressive, why they are so naïve - and why they so very quickly take refuge in an order which, for all that it is no longer the old moral order with its complete rejection of colour, is nevertheless a puritanical order of compromise with nature. This is the order, or reign, of pastels. Clothing, cars, showers, household appliances, plastic surfaces - nowhere here, it seems, is the 'honest' colour that painting once liberated as a 32 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E living force now to be found. Instead we encounter only the pastels, which aspire to be living colours but are in fact merely signs for them, complete with a dash of moralism. All the same, even though these two compromises, the flight into black and white and the flight into pastels, ultimately voice the same disavowal of pure colour as the direct expression of instinctual life, they do not do so in accordance with the same system. The first is systematized by reference to an unequivocally moral and anti-natural black/white paradigm, whereas the pastel solution answers to a system with a larger register founded not on opposition to nature but on natural- ness. Nor do the two systems have the same function. Black (or grey) retains the meaning of distinction, of culture, as opposed to the whole range of vulgar colours.13 As for white, it remains largely pre-eminent in the 'organic' realm: bath- rooms, kitchens, sheets, linen - anything that is bound up with the body and its immediate extensions has for generations been the domain of white, a surgical, virginal colour which distances the body from the dangers of intimacy and tends to neutralize the drives. It is also in this unavoidable area of hygiene and down- to-earth tasks that the use of synthetic materials, such as light metals, formica, nylon, plastiflex, aluminium, and so forth, has experienced its most rapid growth and achieved a dominant position. Of course the lightness and practical utility of these materials have much to do with their success, but the very convenience they offer does not merely lighten the burden of work, it also helps to drain value from this whole basic area. The fluid, simplified lines of our refrigerators or similar machines, with their plastic or artificial lightweight material, operate likewise as a kind of 'whiteness' - as a non-stressed indicator of the presence of these objects that bespeaks the radical omission from our consciousness of the responsibilities they imply, and of bodily functions in general, which are never innocent. Little by little colour is making inroads here, too, but resistance to this development is very deeply felt. In any case, even if kitchens are blue or yellow, even if bathrooms are 13. Already, however, there are quite a few cars that are simply no longer available in black; apart from mourning or other ceremonial uses, black has almost completely disappeared from American life (except where it is brought back as a combining element). 33 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S pink (or even black - a 'snobbish' black as a reaction to the former 'moral' white), we may still justifiably ask to what nature such colours allude. For even if they do not turn pastel, they do connote a kind of nature, one that has its own history: the 'nature' of leisure time and holidays. It is not 'real' nature which suddenly transfigures the atmosphere of daily life, but holidays - that simulacrum of nature, the reverse side of everyday routine, thriving not on nature but on the Idea of Nature. It is holidays that serve as a model here, holidays whose colours devolve into the primary everyday realm. And it was indeed in the fake natural environment of holidays, with its caravan, tents and camping gear, experienced as a model and as a zone of freedom, that the tendency towards bright colours, to plasticity, to the ephemeral practicality of labour-saving gadgets, and so on, first came to the fore. We began by transplanting our little house into Nature, only to end up bringing the values of leisure and the idea of Nature back home with us. There has been a sort of flight of objects into the sphere of leisure: freedom and the absence of responsibilities are thus inscribed both in colours and in the transitory and insignificant character of materials and forms. 'Functional Colour Thus, after a few brief episodes of violent liberation (notably in the world of art, with, in the end, but mild impact upon everyday life - except, of course, for the spheres of advertising and commerce, where colour's power to corrupt enjoys full rein), colour was immediately taken back in hand by a system in which nature no longer plays any part except as naturalness - as a mere connotation of nature behind whose screen instinctual values continue to be subtly disavowed. Nevertheless, the very abstractness of these now 'free' colours means that they are at last able to play an active role. It is towards this third stage that colour is at present orientating itself so far as model objects are concerned: a stage characterized by colour as an atmospheric value. Certainly an 'atmospheric' interplay of this kind is already pre- figured in the colours associated with leisure, but these colours still refer too clearly to a system directly experienced, namely holidays and the primary level of everyday life; consequently they are subject to external constraints. In the fully 34 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E fledged system of atmosphere, by contrast, colours obey no principle but that of their own interaction; no longer constrained in any way, whether by ethical considerations or by nature, they answer to one imperative only - the gauging of atmosphere. Indeed, in a sense we are no longer dealing with colours per se but with more abstract values. The combination, matching and contrast of tones are the real issues when it comes to the relationship between colour and atmosphere. Blue can go with green - all colours are capable of combination - but only certain blues with certain greens; furthermore, it is not so much a question of blue and green as one of hot and cold. At the same time, colour is no longer a way of emphasizing each object by setting it off from the décor; colours are now contrasting ranges of shades, their value has less and less to do with their sensory qualities, they are often dissociated from their form, and it is their tonal differences that give a room its 'rhythm'. Just as modular furniture loses its specific functions so much that at the logical extreme its value resides solely in the positioning of each movable element, so likewise colours lose their unique value, and become relative to each other and to the whole. This is what is meant by describing them as 'functional'. Consider the following descriptions from a practical guide to interior decoration: The framework of the seats has been painted in the same shade as the walls, while the shade chosen for the upholstery echoes that of the hangings. There is harmony between the cold tones, off-white and blue, but certain touches supply the necessary warm response: the gold frame of the Louis XVI mirror, the light-coloured wood of the table, the parquet floor, and the bright red of the carpets. Red here constitutes a sort of upward movement - the red of the carpet, the red of the seats, the red of the cushions - to which is opposed a downward movement in the blues of hangings, settees and chairs.14 14. Betty Pepys, Le guide pratique de la décoration, p. 163. 35 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S A plain matte white background interrupted by great blue surfaces (on the ceiling). White and blue are repeated in the arrangement of the décor: a white marble table, a screen partition. . . . A warm touch is supplied by the bright red doors of a low storage unit. In fact we find ourselves in a space handled entirely in plain colours, devoid of any nuances of tone or of any softness (all the softness having taken refuge in the picture on the left), albeit balanced by large areas of white.15 Here is another example: 'The little indoor tropical garden is not just protected but also lent rhythm by a slab of black enamelled glass/ (Notice that black and white in these descriptions retain nothing of their traditional value; they have escaped from the white-black polarity and taken on a tactical value within the extended range of all colours.) When one considers the advice to 'choose a particular colour because your wall is large or small, because it contains such and such a number of doors, because your furniture is antique or modern, or designed in a European or an exotic tradition, or for some other precise reason',16 it becomes clear that the third stage we have been discussing is indeed characterized by an objectivity of colour; strictly speaking, colour is now one more or less complex factor among others - just one element of a solution. Once again, this is what makes colour 'func- tional' - that is to say, reduced to an abstract conceptual instrument of calculation. Hot and Cold So far as colours are concerned, 'atmosphere' depends upon a calculated balance between hot and cold tones. This is a fundamental distinction which - along with a few others (components/seats,17 design/atmosphere) - helps to endow the discursive system of furnishing with a high degree of coherence, and thus makes it into a determining category of the overall system of objects. (We shall see that 15. Ibid, p. 179. 16. Ibid., p. 191. 17. See below, pp. 44 ff. 36 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E this coherence is perhaps merely that of a manifest discourse beneath which a latent discourse is continually deploying its contradictions.) To get back to the warmth of warm tones: this is clearly not a warmth grounded in confidence, intimacy or affection, nor an organic warmth emanating from colours or sub- stances. Warmth of that kind once had its own density and required no opposing cold tones to define it negatively. Nowadays, on the other hand, both warm and cold tones are required to interact, in each ensemble, with structure and form. When we read that 'The warmth of its materials lends intimacy to this well- designed bureau', or when we are told of 'doors of matte oiled Brazilian rosewood traversed by chrome-plated handles [and] chairs covered in a buff leatherette that blends them perfectly into this austere and warm ensemble', we find that warmth is always contrasted with rigour, organization, structure, or something of the sort, and that every 'value' is defined by this contrast between two poles. 'Functional' warmth is thus a warmth that no longer issues forth from a warm substance, nor from a harmonious juxtaposition of particular objects, but instead arises from the systematic oscillation or abstract synchrony of a perpetual 'warm-and- cold' which in reality continually defers any real 'warm' feeling. This is a purely signified warmth - hence one which, by definition, is never realized: a warmth characterized, precisely, by the absence of any source. Atmospheric Values: Materials Natural Wood/Cultural Wood The same sort of analysis applies to materials - to wood, for example, so sought after today for nostalgic reasons. Wood draws its substance from the earth, it lives and breathes and 'labours'. It has its latent warmth; it does not merely reflect, like glass, but burns from within. Time is embedded in its very fibres, which makes it the perfect container, because every content is something we want to rescue from time. Wood has its own odour, it ages, it even has parasites, and so on. In short, it is a material that has being. Think of the notion of 'solid oak' - a living idea for each of us, evoking as it does the succession of generations, massive furniture and ancestral family homes. The question we must ask, however, is 37 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S whether this 'warmth' of wood (or likewise the 'warmth' of freestone, natural leather, unbleached linen, beaten copper, or any of the elements of the material and maternal dream that now feeds a high-priced nostalgia) still has any meaning. By now functional substitutes for virtually all organic and natural materials have been found in the shape of plastic and polymorphous substances: wool, cotton, silk and linen are thus all susceptible of replacement by nylon and its count- less variants, while wood, stone and metal are giving way to concrete and polystyrene.18 There can be no question of rejecting this tendency and simply dreaming of the ideal warm and human substance of the objects of former times. The distinction between natural and synthetic substances, just like that between traditional colours and bright colours, is strictly a value judgement. Objectively, substances are simply what they are: there is no such thing as a true or a false, a natural or an artificial substance. How could concrete be somehow less 'authentic' than stone? We apprehend old synthetic materials such as paper as altogether natural - indeed, glass is one of the richest substances we can conceive of. In the end, the inherited nobility of a given material can exist only for a cultural ideology analogous to that of the aristocratic myth itself in the social world - and even that cultural prejudice is vulnerable to the passage of time. The point is to understand, apart from the vast horizons opened up on the practical level by these new substances, just how they have changed the 'meaning' of the materials we use. Just as the shift to shades (warm, cold or intermediate) means that colours are stripped of their moral and symbolic status in favour of an abstract quality which makes their systematization and interplay possible, so likewise the manufacture of synthetics means that materials lose their symbolic naturalness and become 18. This development at least partially realizes the substantialist myth which, beginning in the sixteenth cen- tury, informed the stucco and the worldly demiurgy of the baroque style: the notion that the whole world could be cast from a single ready-made material. This substantialist myth is one aspect of the functionalist myth that I discuss elsewhere, and the equivalent on the material plane of automatism on the functional one. The idea is that a 'machine of machines' would replace all human gestures and institute a synthetic universe. It should be borne in mind, however, that the 'substantialist' dream is the most primitive and repressive aspect of the myth as a whole, for it continues to enshrine a pre-mechanist alchemy of transubstantiation. 38 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E polymorphous, so achieving a higher degree of abstractness which makes possible a universal play of associations among materials, and hence too a transcendence of the formal antithesis between natural and artificial materials. There is thus no longer any difference 'in nature' between a Thermoglass partition and a wooden one, between rough concrete and leather: whether they embody 'warm' or 'cold' values, they all now have exactly the same status as component materials. These materials, though disparate in themselves, are nevertheless homogeneous as cultural signs, and thus susceptible of organization into a coherent system. Their abstractness makes it possible to combine them at will.19 The Logic of Atmosphere This 'discourse of atmosphere' concerning colours, substance, volume, space, and so on mobilizes all these elements simultaneously in a great systematic reorgani- zation: it is because furniture now comprises movable elements in a decentralized space, and because it has a correspondingly lighter structure based on assembly and veneers, that there is a case for more 'abstract' woods - teak, mahogany, rosewood or certain Scandinavian woods.20 And it so happens that the colours of these woods are not traditional either, but lighter or darker variations, often var- nished, lacquered, or left deliberately unfinished; the main point, though, is that the colour in question, like the wood itself, is always abstract - an object of mental manipulation along with everything else. The entire modern environment is thus 19. And this is the difference, for instance, between the 'solid oak' of old and the present-day use of teak. Teak is not fundamentally distinct from oak in respect of origin, exoticism or cost; it is its use in the creation of atmosphere which means that it is no longer a primary natural material, dense and warm, but, rather, a mere cultural sign of such warmth, and by virtue of that fact reinstated qua sign, like so many other 'noble' materials, in the system of the modern interior: no longer wood-as-material but wood-as-component. And now, instead of the quality of presence, it has atmospheric value. 20. Certainly these woods are technically better suited than oak to the needs of veneering and assembling. It must also be said that exoticism plays the same role here as the idea of holidays does in the use of bright colours: it evokes the myth of an escape via 'naturalness'. The essential point, however, is that for all these rea- sons these woods are 'secondary' woods, embodying a cultural abstraction that enables them to partake of the logic of the system. 39 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S transposed onto the level of a sign system, namely ATMOSPHERE, which is no longer produced by the way any particular element is handled, nor by the beauty or ugliness of that element. That used to be true for the inconsistent and subjective system of tastes and colours, of de gustibus non est disputandum, but under the present system the success of the whole occurs in the context of the constraints of abstraction and association. Whether or not you care for teak, for example, you are obliged to acknowledge that its use is consistent with the organization of component elements, that its shade is consistent with a plane surface, hence also with a particular 'rhythm' of space, etc., etc. - and that this is indeed the law of the system. There is nothing at all - not antiques, not rustic furniture in solid wood, not even precious or craft objects - that cannot be incorporated into the interactions of the system, thus attesting to the boundless possibilities of such abstract integration. The current proliferation of such objects does not constitute a contradiction in the system:21 they enter the system precisely as the most 'modern' materials and colours, and as atmospheric elements. Only a traditional and fundamentally naïve view would find inconsis- tency in the encounter, on a teak-veneered chest, of a futuristic cube in raw metal and the rotten wood of a sixteenth-century carving. The point is, though, that the consistency here is not the natural consistency of a unified taste but the consistency of a cultural system of signs. Not even a 'Provençal' room, not even an authentic Louis XVI drawing-room, can attest to anything beyond a vain nostalgic desire to escape from the modern cultural system: both are just as far removed from the 'style' they ape as any formica-topped table or any black-metal and leatherette tubular chair. An exposed ceiling beam is every bit as abstract as a chrome-plated tube or an Emauglas partition. What nostalgia paints as an authentic whole object is still nothing but a combining variant, as is indeed signalled by the language used in speaking of provincial or period 'ensembles'. The word 'ensemble', closely related to 'atmosphere', serves to reintroduce any conceivable element, whatever subjective associations it may carry, into the logic of the system. That this system is affected 21. It does indicate a shortcoming of the system - but a successfully integrated one. On this point, see the discussion of antiques below. 40 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E by ideological connotations and latent motives is indisputable, and we shall return to this question later. But it is incontestable, too, that its logic, which is that of a combination of signs, is irreversible and limitless. No object can escape this logic, just as no product can escape the formal logic of the commodity. A Model Material: Glass One material sums up the idea of atmosphere and may be thought of as embodying a universal function in the modern environment. That material is GLASS. Advertising calls it 'the material of the future' - a future which, as we all know, will itself be 'transparent'. Glass is thus both the material used and the ideal to be achieved, both end and means. So much for metaphysics. Psychologically speaking, glass in its practical, as in its imaginary uses has many merits. It is the ideal modern recipient: it does not 'pick up the taste', it does not change over time as a function of its content, as do wood and metal, nor does it shroud that content in mystery. Glass eliminates all confusion in short order, and does not conduct heat. Fundamentally it is less a recipient than an isolator - the miracle of a rigid fluid - a content that is also a container, and hence the basis of a transparency between the two: a kind of transcendence which, as we have seen, is the first priority in the creation of atmosphere. Moreover, glass implies a symbolism of access to a secondary state of consciousness, and at the same time it is ranked symbolically at zero level on the scale of materials. Its symbolism is one of solidification - hence of abstractness. This abstractness opens the door to the abstractness of the inner world: the crystal of madness; to the abstractness of the future: the clairvoyant's crystal ball; and to the abstractness of nature: the other worlds to which the eye gains entry via microscope or telescope. And certainly, with its indestructibility, immunity to decay, colourless- ness, odourlessness, and so on, glass exists at a sort of zero level of matter: glass is to matter as a vacuum is to air. We have already noted the operation of the values of play and calculation, combined with abstraction, apropos of the system of atmos- phere. Above all, though, glass is the most effective conceivable material expression of the fundamental ambiguity of 'atmosphere': the fact that it is at once proximity and distance, intimacy and the refusal of intimacy, communication and non- 41 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S communication. Whether as packaging, window or partition, glass is the basis of a transparency without transition: we see, but cannot touch. The message is universal and abstract. A shop window is at once magical and frustrating - the strategy of advertising in epitome. The transparency of jars containing food products implies a formal satisfaction, a kind of visual collusion, yet basically the relationship is one of exclusion. Glass works exactly like atmosphere in that it allows nothing but the sign of its content to emerge, in that it interposes itself in its transparency, just as the system of atmosphere does in its abstract consistency, between the materiality of things and the materiality of needs. Not to mention glass's cardinal virtue, which is of a moral order: its purity, reliability and objectivity, along with all those connotations of hygiene and prophylaxis which make it truly the material of the future - a future, after all, that is to be one of disavowal of the body, and of the primary and organic functions, in the name of a radiant and functional objectivity (of which hygiene is the moral version for the body). Live in a garden in close intimacy with nature - experience the charm of every season totally, without giving up the comforts of a modern living space. This is the new heaven on earth, the grace bestowed by houses with picture windows. Glass tile or block set in concrete makes it possible to construct translucent walls, partitions, arches and ceilings that are as strong as if they were built of stone. Such 'transpartitions' allow the passage of light, which is thus able freely to permeate the whole house. But, since the glass used is not see-through, the privacy of each room is preserved. Clearly the age-old symbolism of the 'house of glass' is still with us, even though in the modern version it has lost much of its sublime aspect. The distinction accorded transcendence has given way to that accorded atmosphere (just as in the case of mirrors). Glass facilitates faster communication between inside and outside, yet at the same time it sets up an invisible but material caesura which prevents such communica- tion from becoming a real opening onto the world. Indeed, the modern 'house of 42 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E glass' does not open onto the outside at all; instead it is the outside world, nature, landscape, that penetrates, thanks to glass and its abstractness, into the intimate or private realm inside, and there 'plays freely' as a component of atmosphere. The whole world thus becomes integrated as spectacle into the domestic universe.22 The Man of Relationship and Atmosphere From the foregoing account of colours and materials we may already draw a number of conclusions. The systematic alternation between hot and cold is fundamentally a defining trait of the concept of 'atmosphere' itself, for atmosphere is always both warmth and distance. The 'atmospheric' interior is designed to permit the same alternation between warmth and non-warmth, between intimacy and distance, to operate not only between the objects that comprise it but also between the human beings who live in it. Friend or relative, family or customer - some relationship is always required, but it is supposed to remain mobile and 'functional'; in other words, the aim is that relating should be possible at every instant, but its subjective aspects should no longer be problematic, and the various relationships should therefore be freely 22. The ambiguity of glass becomes especially clear when we shift our focus from living-spaces to consump- tion and packaging - areas where its use is ever on the increase. Here too glass has all the desirable qualities: it protects the product against deterioration, letting nothing in but the appraising glance. 'To contain the product properly and let it be seen': a perfect definition of the goal of packaging. Mouldable to any form, glass offers unlimited options from the aesthetic point of view. We may confidently expect that before long it will be used to 'present' fruit and vegetables, ensuring that they remain as fresh as the morning dew. Very likely it will soon be enclosing even ordinary steaks with its transparent sheath. Invisible yet ubiquitous, it will constitute the ideal analogue of a more beautiful and limpidly clear life. Further, whatever purpose it may serve, glass can never become true refuse because it is without odour. It is a 'noble' material. All the same, the consumer is invited to throw it out after using it: 'No deposit - no return'. Glass thus cloaks the purchase in its 'indestructible' prestige - yet must be destroyed immediately. Is there a contradiction here? Not really, because glass is still playing its part as a component of atmosphere, but in this case 'atmosphere' has attained its full economic meaning, that of packaging. Glass sells things, it is functional in that sense, but it must also be consumed itself and, indeed, consumed at an accelerated rate. The psychological function of glass (its trans- parency and purity) is thus totally recuperated and submerged by its economic function. The sublime ends up as a motivation to buy. 43 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S interchangeable. Such is the nature of functional relationships, from which desire is (in theory) absent, having been neutralized for the sake of atmosphere.23 This, however, is where ambiguity begins.24 Seats This ambiguity is attested to by the objects that best express the relationship of atmosphere: seats, which we see continually alternating in the system of modern furnishing with modular components. These antithetical kinds of objects concretize the opposition between the concepts of interior design and atmosphere (although they do not constitute the sole underpinnings of that opposition). The minimal function of the countless seats that fill the furnishing and home- decorating magazines is unquestionably to permit people to sit down: to sit down to rest, or sit down at a table to eat. But chairs no longer gravitate towards a table; these days seats take on their own meaning, while tables - typically low coffee tables - are subordinate to them. This meaning, moreover, refers not to the posture of the body but to the position of interlocutors relative to each other. The general arrangement of the seating and slight changes in people's positions in the course of an evening may be said, for example, to constitute a discourse in themselves. Modern seating - pouf or settee, wall-sofa or easy chair - invariably lays the stress on sociability and conversation, promoting a sort of all-purpose position, appro- priate to the modern social human being, which de-emphasizes everything in the sitting posture that suggests confrontation. No more beds for lying in, no more chairs for sitting at25 - instead, 'functional' seats which treat all positions, and 23. Even sexuality itself in its modern conception is subsumed by the functional relationship. As distinct from sensuality, which is warm and instinctual, sexuality is at once HOT AND COLD - by virtue of this it ceases to be a passion and becomes nothing but an atmospheric value. 24. In the system of objects, as in all directly experienced systems, the major structural antitheses are always in effect more complicated than they seem, for what appears as a structural antithesis from the standpoint of the system may well be simply a consistent rationalization of an underlying conflict. 25. Except for chairs at the dining-table - which are upright and have peasant-like overtones. But this evidences a reflex cultural process. 44 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E hence all human relationships, as a free synthesis. All moral overtones are gone: one no longer sits opposite anyone. It is impossible to become angry in such seats, or to argue, or to seek to persuade. They dictate a relaxed social interaction which makes no demands, which is open-ended but above all open to play. From their depths one is no longer obliged to meet another person's gaze or to look directly at them: these seats are so designed that one's eyes are entitled simply to look people over in a general way, for their positioning and depth combine to keep everyone's eye level 'naturally' at half the usual altitude - at an ill-defined elevation which is also that of the flow of words. Seats of this kind may well respond to a basic current concern, namely the wish never to be alone - but never to be face to face with another person either. The body is invited to relax, but it is above all the gaze, with all its perils, that must be put out to grass. Even as modern society frees us in large measure from the promiscuity of primary functions, it exacerbates the promiscuity of secondary ones, especially that of the gaze and its tragic dimension. Accordingly, just as primary demands are veiled, so likewise every effort is made to relieve social intercourse of all its rough edges, contradic- toriness and, ultimately, obscenity - what is obscene here being the direct play of aggression and desire in the gaze. The binary opposition between 'components' and 'seats' thus amounts to a complete system: modular components are the vehicle of modern man's organiz- ing discourse, while from the depths of his chairs he proffers a discourse of rela- tionship.26 So 'man the interior designer' is always coupled with the 'man of relationship and atmosphere', and the two together give us 'functional man'. 26. Or perhaps, after all, simply a passive discourse - for we should not forget that advertising is far less inclined to enjoin the active arrangement of furniture than to stress the passive joys of relaxation. On this point the notion of atmosphere is similarly ambiguous, for it has both active and passive implications. 'Functional man' is exhausted from the start. And the millions of leather and Dunlopillo armchairs, each deeper than the last, whose modern virtues of atmosphere and repose fill the pages of the glossy magazines, amount to a sort of massive invitation from our future civilization to resolve all our tensions and bask in a placid seventh-day euphoria. The whole ideology of that civilization - still far distant, yet imminent in model objects - is to be found in these images of an idyllic, neo-pastoral modernity in which the inhabitant communes with his atmosphere from the mellow depths of his chair. Having solved the problems of his emotions, his functions and his contradictions, so that all that is left are relationships, a system of relationships whose structure he 45 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Cultural Connotation and Censorship For seats, then, but also for all other objects, cultural connotation is now as essential a requirement as calculation. In earlier times furniture stated its function. The fun- damental nurturing function of the house found unequivocal expression in tables and sideboards that were heavy, round-bellied - overloaded with connotations of motherhood. Furniture whose function was taboo was flatly withdrawn from view, as in the case of a bed concealed in an alcove. As for the bed in the middle of the room, it was even more eloquent in its embodiment of bourgeois marriage (and not, of course, of sexuality). Today the bed is no more - in its place we have only couches, divans, settees and banquettes. Some 'beds' now disappear into the wall, bowing not to moral stricture but to abstract logic.27 Tables are low, no longer centrally placed, weightless. The whole kitchen has lost its culinary function and is now a functional laboratory, This is progress, moreover, because the traditional environment, for all its directness, was an environment of moral obsession that bespoke the material difficulty of living. We do have more freedom in the modern interior, but this freedom is accompanied by a subtler formalism and a new moralism: everything here indicates the obligatory shift from eating, sleeping and procreating to smoking, drinking, entertaining, discussing, looking and reading. Visceral functions have given way to functions determined by culture. The sideboard used to hold linen, crockery or food; the functional elements of today house books, knick-knacks, a cocktail bar, or nothing at all. The term 'refined' - which, like 'functional', is a catchword of manipulated interior decoration - sums up this cultural constraint perfectly. Rooms have traded in the symbols of family for signs of social relationship. Once a solemn backdrop for affection, they are rediscovers in a system of objects; having infused the space around him with life and 'created' a multiplicity of ways to integrate his modules into the room as a whole (much as he himself is integrated into the social whole); having thus put together a world absolved of drives and primary functions but overloaded with social connotations of calculation and prestige - having done all this, and tired out by his efforts, the modern home- dweller is ready to cosset his ennui by plunging into an easy chair whose form is a perfect match for the form of his body. 27. An exception here is an object reintroduced with a new connotation that occludes its earlier obscenity, a case in point being the old free-standing eighteenth-century Spanish bed. (See the discussion of antiques below.) 46 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E now an equally ritualistic décor of reception. A close reading of modern house- furnishings reveals that they converse among themselves with an ease in every way comparable to that of the dinner guests, that they mingle and drift apart with the very same freedom, and that they convey the same message: namely, that it is quite possible to live without working. Of course, culture has always played the ideological role of pacifier, sublimating tensions associated with functional imperatives and answering the need for being to take on recognizable form beyond the material reality and conflicts of the world. Such a form - which attests, despite everything, to the existence of a purpose, and ensures the direct memory of a fundamental security - is no doubt even more urgently needed in a technological civilization. It is just that, like the reality it simultaneously reflects and disavows, this form is now being systematized. Systematic technicity calls forth systematic cultural connotation. And this systematic cultural connotation at the level of objects is what I am calling ATMOSPHERE. Atmospheric Values: Gestural Systems and Forms When we come, in our continuing analysis of atmospheric values, to the considera- tion of 'functional' forms (variously described as 'contoured', 'dynamic', etc.), we find that the 'stylization' of such forms cannot be disentangled from the stylization of the human gestural systems which correspond to them. The style of such gestural systems always implies the suppression of muscular energy, of labour. Primary functions are overwritten by secondary ones, by relationship and calculation, and instinctual drives give way to cultural connotation. All these tendencies are mediated practically and historically, at the level of objects, by the fundamental supersession of the gestural system of effort, by the great shift from a universal gestural system of labour to a universal gestural system of control. This is the turning-point at which a status enjoyed by objects for millennia, their anthropomorphic status, is definitively terminated - destroyed by the new abstractness of energy sources. 47 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S The Traditional Gestural System: Effort So long as the energy applied was muscular in character, and hence immediate and contingent, the tool remained embedded in human relations, rich symbolically speaking but not particularly well designed structurally. The adoption of animals as a source of power did not represent a qualitative change: for entire civilizations human and animal power were essentially on a par. The unchanging nature of the energy employed meant that tools, too, underwent little change. Thus the status of the tool or manual object varied hardly at all over the centuries. Man's profound gestural relationship to objects, which epitomizes his integration into the world, into social structures, can be a highly fulfilling one, and this fulfilment is discernible in the beauty - the 'style' - of the relationship in its reciprocity. It nevertheless constitutes a constraint which, in tandem with the constraints imposed by social structures, stands in the way of real productivity. We cannot but admire scythes, baskets, pitchers or ploughs, amalgams of gestures and forces, of symbols and func- tions, decorated and stylized by human energy and shaped by the forms of the human body, by the exertions they imply and by the matter they transform; yet the magnificence of such conformities remains subordinate to the limitations of the relationship in question. Man is not free with respect to these objects, nor are these objects free with respect to man. A revolution in energy sources had to occur - long-range practical control had to become possible, along with the storage and measurement of a newly mobile energy - before man and object could be drawn into a fresh, objective dialogue, into a conflict-laden dialectic which had never been implicit in the reciprocal goal-directedness of their former constrained relationship. Only then could man embark upon an objective process of social development and the object likewise tend in the direction of its own truth, that is, its functionality multiplied by the amount of energy released. For the real object is the functional object. Revolutions in the field of energy entail the replacement of energy symbiosis and symbolic compliance by the rationality of technology and the (relative) rationality of the reign of production. By the same token, man's relationship to objects becomes subject to a social dialectic which is basically that of the forces of production. What interests us here, however, is the impact of this upheaval on the realm of everyday life. 48 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E The Functional Gestural System: Control We know from our practical experience how very far the mediation of gestures between man and things has been stretched: household appliances, cars, gadgetry, heating, lighting, communications and transportation systems - all require no more than minimal energy and action in order to function properly. Often a slight motion of hand or eye suffices; no dexterity is called for - at the most, reflexes. The domestic world, almost as much as the world of work, is governed by regular gestures of control and remote control. Buttons, levers, handles, pedals (even nothing at all - as when one passes in front of a photo-electric cell) have thus replaced pressure, percussion, impact or balance achieved by means of the body, the intensity and distribution of force, and the abilities of the hand (from which little more than quickness is now asked). A prehension of objects involving the whole body has given way to simple contact (of hand or foot) and simple surveillance (by the eye or, occasionally, by the ear). In other words, only man's 'extremities7 now have an active part to play in the functional environment. The liberating abstractness of energy sources is thus accompanied by a concomitant abstractness of human praxis with respect to objects. What is called for here is less a neuromuscular praxis than what Pierre Naville describes as a system of cerebro-sensory vigilance. But such a system cannot be self-sufficient: the total abstractness of remote action must be mitigated by what I refer to as a gestural system of control (by hand, eye, etc.).28 There is a sense in which this minimal gestural system is essential, for without it all this abstract power would become meaningless. Man has to be reassured about his power by some sense of participation, albeit a merely formal one. So the gestural system of control must be deemed indispensable - not to make the system work technically, for more 28. To be more exact, it is not simply that the old gestural system of effort has been stretched out into a gestural system of control: it has also been split into a gestural system of control and a gestural system of play. Ignored by modern praxis, but nonetheless freed from its old constraints, the body finds genuine expression in sports and physical leisure activities - or at any rate, these supply it with a compensatory release, for we may well ask whether the splitting into two of the gestural system of effort institutes any real freedom of the body, or whether it merely establishes a binomial whose second term (in this case, games and sports) does no more than compensate for the first. A parallel might be drawn here with the splitting of time into active time and leisure time. 49 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S advanced technology could (and no doubt will) make it unnecessary, but, rather, to make that system work psychologically. A New Operational Field Since the energy of objects is abstract, their functionality is limitless: just as there is now scarcely any substance that has no plastic equivalent, so there is no gesture that cannot be replaced by technology. The simplest of mechanisms is liable to replace and subsume a whole set of gestures, concentrating their effectiveness and becoming independent not only of the agent but also of the material acted upon. Form and utility of the tool, raw material, energy applied - all these factors have changed. Thus the matter dealt with has undergone infinite differentiation - even to the point of disappearing altogether: that processed by a radio, for example, is information. The transformation of energy has entailed that of both materials and functions, for technology is not content merely to encapsulate earlier gestures, it also invents new operations, and above all splits up the operational field into completely different functions or sets of functions. Man's abstract relationship to his (technical) objects, his 'spectacular alienation', is thus less a matter of his gestures having been replaced than of the abstractness of the very way in which functions have been split up, and the impossibility of any analogical apprehension of this splitting-up by reference to earlier gestures.29 Only an abstract (never an unmediated) intelligence can adapt to the new technical structures; meanwhile, man himself has yet to adapt to the increasingly exclusive use of these higher functions of intelligence and calculation. Resistance here has deep roots, and creates an irreparable delay. Man has become less rational than his own objects, which now run ahead of him, so to speak, organizing his surroundings and thus 29. The fire is a case in point. Originally the 'hearth' filled the combined functions of heating, cooking and lighting. This was the basis of its symbolic complexity. Later, the kitchen stove - already a kind of appliance - took over the functions of heating and cooking, while retaining a certain symbolic presence. Eventually all three tasks were separated in analytic fashion and assigned to separate specialized appliances whose synthetic aspect lay not in the concrete unity of the hearth but solely in the abstract identity of the energy (gas or electricity) on which they ran. This new environment, based on a completely different division of functions, has no symbolic dimension whatsoever. 50 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E appropriating his actions. Take the washing machine, for instance. In its form and operation it has no clear relationship to the clothes washed. The whole operation of washing has lost its specificity in space and time; it is a minimal intervention, a timed procedure in which the water itself is no more than an abstract vehicle for detergent chemicals. Functionally speaking, the washing machine belongs, therefore, to a relational field utterly different from that of the old-fashioned washboard or washtub - a functional field of associations which is no longer co- extensive with other objective operations, with the refrigerator, with the television, with the components of interior design, or with the automobile. Traditional tools, by contrast, belonged to a field of practical mediation between the material to be transformed and the person doing the transforming. We have thus moved from the depth of a vertical field to the extension of a horizontal one. Just as the various parts of an object's mechanism have structure, so the various technical objects tend, independently of man, to become organized by themselves, to refer to one another in the uniformity of their simplified praxis, and thus come to constitute an articulated order, pursuing its own mode of technological development, wherein man's role does not go beyond a mechanical control which may well ultimately be taken over by the machine itself. Miniaturization In place of the continuous (but finite) space that gestures create for their purposes around the traditional object, the technical object institutes discontinuous and unlimited extension. The principle that regulates this new extension, this functional dimension, is the requirement that organization be maximized and communication optimized. Consequently, technological progress is now accompanied by an ever stronger tendency towards the miniaturization of technical objects. Freed now from the need to refer to the human scale, to the 'life-size', and ever more taken up by the complexity of messages, mechanisms tend increasingly, on the model of the brain, towards an irreversible concentration of their structures, towards the quintessentially microcosmic.30 After the Promethean expansion of a 30. This is the reason for our fascination with miniaturized watches, transistor radios, cameras, and so forth. 51 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S technology striving to occupy the whole world, the entirety of space, we are now entering the era of a technology that works on the world 'in depth', so to speak. The reign of electronics and cybernetics means that efficiency, freed from the shackles of gestural space, is henceforward dependent upon a saturation of minimal extension, governing a maximized field, which is without common measure with sensory experience.31 Stylization, Manipulability, Envelopment The stylization of forms is invariably a corollary of the growing autonomy of the functional world and the optimized organization of space in its extension. Forms themselves also become more autonomous as they diverge further and further from a morphology founded on the human body and on the physical effort exerted by that body, yet they continue to allude thereto in one way or another. They organize themselves independently, but their former relationship to primary functions subsists in the abstractness of the sign: this is their connotation. Consider the hand, whose importance for the gestural system of control we have already mentioned. The first aim of all modern objects is manipulability ('manipulable' being virtually synonymous with 'functional'). But just what is the nature of the 'hand' which thus 31. This tendency to miniaturize may seem paradoxical in the context of a civilization of extension, expansion and spatialization. It is a tendency, however, that embodies both the ideal goal of that civilization and a contradiction within it. For our technological civilization is also a civilization of limits imposed on urban life, of a critical scarcity of space. And it is increasingly, by absolute everyday necessity (and not just by structural necessity), a civilization of the 'compact7. There is undoubtedly a link between lasers, calculators and micro- technology on the one hand and small cars, multifunctional gadgets, 'planned' flats and transistor radios on the other - but this link is not necessarily structural or logical. The principle of maximum organization which gives rise to technologies of miniaturization has the parallel function of palliating (though not resolving) a chronic shortage of space in everyday life. The two functions are not structurally related; it is simply that both are bound up with each other in the context of a single system. As for the everyday technical object, caught between the two, it is uncertain whether it represents a technological advance (miniaturization) or a degrad- ing of the practical system (shortage of space). (The antagonism between structural technological evolution and the constraints of scarcity which govern the system as directly experienced is discussed later - see 'The Transformations of Technology', pp. 123 ff. below.) 52 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E determines the forms of these objects? Certainly no longer the prehensile organ that focuses effort: rather, nothing more than the abstract sign of manipulability, to which buttons, handles, and so on are all the better suited in that the operation concerned no longer calls for manual labour and, indeed, takes place elsewhere. Here we rediscover (though now on the morphological plane) the myth of naturalness of which we spoke above: the human body delegates no more than the signs of its presence to objects whose functioning, in any case, is independent from now on. At the very most it delegates its 'extremities', while objects, for their part, are 'contoured' in accordance with an abstract morphological meaning. There is a collusion of forms here which no longer refers to man save by way of allusion.32 It is in this sense only that the object's form 'weds' the hand, that Airborne's armchair (of which more later) 'weds' the shape of your body: one form adapts to another. The traditional object or tool, by contrast, was not in any way 'wedded' to human forms; what it wedded was human physical effort and human gestures - indeed, the human body imposed itself upon that tool in order to carry out a material task. Today the human body would seem to be present only as the abstract justification for the finished form of the functional object. Functionality is thus no longer the imposition of a real task, but simply the adaptation of one form to another (as of handle to hand) and the consequent supersession or omission of the actual processes of work. Thus freed from practical functions and from the human gestural system, forms become purely relative with respect both to one another and to the space to which they lend 'rhythm'. This is how we now define the 'style' of objects: inasmuch as their mechanism is virtual or taken for granted (a few simple gestures evoke its power without making it manifest, while the effective physical embodi- ment of the object remains indecipherable), it is only their form which is present - which wraps that mechanism in its perfection and confines it within its contours, cloaking and eliminating an energy that has been made into an abstraction and, as it were, crystallized. As in the development of some animal species, the form is externalized, enclosing the object in a sort of carapace. Fluid, transitive, enveloping, it unifies appearances by transcending the alarming discontinuity of the various 32. Just as we saw that in the realm of atmosphere, nature is no more than an allusion. 53 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S mechanisms involved and replacing it with a coherent whole. A functional atmosphere implies a continuous closure of line (also of material - of chrome, enamel or plastic) which restores the unity of a world whose profound equilibrium was formerly guaranteed by human gestures. We are heading towards an abso- lutism of forms: only the form is called for, only the form is read, and at the deepest level it is the functionality of forms that defines 'style'. The End of the Symbolic Dimension The fact is that this formal achievement papers over an essential lack; our techno- logical civilization tries to use the universal transitivity of form as a means of compensating for the disappearance of the symbolic relationship associated with the traditional gestural system of work, as a way of making up for the unreality, the symbolic void, of our power.33 For gestural mediation is by no means confined to the practical realm, and the energy invested in physical effort is not merely muscular and nervous. Gestures and physical effort are also the vectors of a whole phallic symbolism, as deployed, for example, in such notions as penetration, resistance, moulding or rubbing. The rhythm of the sexual act is the prototype of all rhythmical gestures, and all technological praxis is overdetermined by it.34 Because they press the whole body into the service of effort and accomplishment, traditional objects and tools acquire something of the deep libidinal cathexis of sexual exchange (as, at another level, do 33. The last thing I want to do, however, is romanticize either physical labour or the traditional gestural system. When one contemplates the centuries during which man was obliged to make up with his own strength for the shortcomings of his tools, when one recalls that, long after the day of slaves and serfs, peasants and craftsmen continued to manipulate objects unchanged since the Stone Age, one can only applaud the new abstractness of energy sources and the decline of a gestural system which was, after all, an appurtenance of servitude. The 'soulless machinism' of today - down to and including electric potato-mashers - is what has made it possible to get beyond the strict equivalence of gesture and product which once used up every moment of every endless day: at long last human gestures can embody a surplus. The consequences on another level, however, are nonetheless very far-reaching. 34. See Gaston Bachelard and Gilbert Durand, Les structures anthropologiques de l'Imaginaire (second edition, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1963). 54 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E dance and ritual).35 But of course all this is discouraged, demobilized, by the advent of the technical object. Everything once sublimated - and hence cathected symbolically - in the gestural system of work is now repressed. No vestige remains in our technical utilities of the theatrical and anarchic outgrowths of the objects of earlier times, which showed their age, and made no secret of the work they did. Spades and pitchers were living phalluses or vaginas in whose 'obscenity' the instinctual dynamics of human beings lay open to a symbolic reading.36 The whole gestural system of work was also obscene, in sharp contrast to the miniaturized and abstract gestural system of control to which it has now been reduced. The world of the objects of old seems like a theatre of cruelty and instinctual drives in comparison with the formal neutrality and prophylactic 'whiteness' of our perfect functional objects. Thus the handle of the flatiron gradually diminishes as it undergoes 'contouring' - the term is typical in its superficiality and abstractness; increasingly it suggests the very absence of gesture, and carried to its logical extreme this handle will no longer be manual - merely manipulable. At that point, the perfecting of the form will have relegated man to a pure contemplation of his power. The Abstractness of Power Man's technical power can thus no longer be mediated, for it has no common measure with the human being and the human body. Nor, by extension, can it any longer be symbolized: functional forms can do no more than connote it. Certainly they overburden it with meaning in their absolute consistency (aerodynamism, manipulability, automaticity, etc.), but at the same time they are formal expressions 35. Similarly, it is arguable that the gestural system also facilitates the integration into objects of what Piaget calls paternal and maternal 'affective schemata' - the child's relationships to its primal human milieu: the father and mother themselves appear to the child as tools surrounded by other, secondary, tools. 36. Thus the classic maternal house of children's drawings, with its doors and windows, symbolizes both the child itself (a human face) and the body of the mother. Like the disappearance of the old gestural system, the disappearance of this traditional house, complete with storeys, staircase, attic and cellar, signals first and fore- most the frustration of a faculty of symbolic recognition: the modern order disappoints us because it stymies any profound involvement, any visceral perception of our own body; because we can now recognize therein scarcely any aspect of our bodily organs, of our somatic organization. 55 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S of the void that separates us from our power; in a sense they are the ritual that accompanies the miracle-working of the modern world. They are the signs of our power, then, but also testimony to our irresponsibility with respect to that power. It is here, perhaps, that we should seek the reason for the morose technical satisfaction to which initial euphoria over mechanical achievement has so quickly given way, for the peculiar anxiety that takes hold of all beneficiaries of the wonders of the object, of obligatory non-involvement, and of the passively observed spectacle of their own power. The uselessness of habitual gestures and the breakdown of everyday routines founded on movements of the body have a profound psycho- physiological impact. Indeed, a genuine revolution has taken place on the everyday plane: objects have now become more complex than human behaviour relative to them. Objects are more and more highly differentiated - our gestures less and less so. To put it another way: objects are no longer surrounded by the theatre of gesture in which they used to be simply the various roles; instead their emphatic goal- directedness has very nearly turned them into the actors in a global process in which man is merely the role, or the spectator. There is a moral to be drawn from the following little tale. We are in the eighteenth century. An illusionist well versed in clockwork has devised an au- tomaton. An automaton so perfect, with movements so fluid and natural, that when the illusionist and his creation appear on the stage together, the audience cannot tell which is which. The illusionist then finds himself obliged to make his own gestures mechanical, and - in what is really the pinnacle of his art - to alter his own appearance slightly so as to give his show its full meaning; the spectators would eventually chafe if they were left in doubt as to which of the two figures was 'real7, and the neatest solution is that they should take the man for the machine, and vice versa.... This story provides a good illustration of a familiar fatal relationship to technology, even though in the case of modern reality we do not awake to the applause of an audience delighted to have been so thoroughly duped; a good analogy for a society with a technical apparatus so highly perfected that it appears to be a 'synthetic' gestural system superior to the traditional system, a sovereign projection of fully realized mental structures. For the time being the human gesture 56 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E is still alone capable of supplying the precision and flexibility demanded by certain tasks, but there is no reason to assume that the unceasing forward march of techne will not eventually achieve a mimesis which replaces a natural world with an intelligible artificial one. If the simulacrum is so well designed that it becomes an effective organizer of reality, then surely it is man, not the simulacrum, who is turned into an abstraction. It was already apparent to Lewis Mumford that 'the machine leads to a lapse of function which is but one step away from paralysis'.37 This is no longer a mechanistic hypothesis but reality as directly experienced: the behaviour that technical objects impose is a broken-up sequence of impoverished gestures, of sign-gestures bereft of rhythm. It is rather like what happens to the illusionist of the story who, in response to the perfection of his machine, is led to dismantle and mechanize himself. The coherence of his own structural projection thus relegates man to the inchoate. In the face of the functional object the human being becomes dysfunctional, irrational and subjective: an empty form, open therefore to the mythology of the functional, to projected phantasies stemming from the stupefying efficiency of the outside world. The Functionalist Myth For the concrete dynamic of effort has not disappeared completely into the abstrac- tion of the mechanisms and gestures of control. It has been internalized as the mental dynamic of a functionalist myth: the myth of the possibility of a totally functional world of which every present-day technical object is already a sign. The repressed gestural system is thus transformed into myth, projection, transcendence. No sooner do we lose sight of the route taken by energy, feel energy to be intrinsic to the object, become the non-responsible beneficiaries of an absence (or near- absence) of any need for gesture and physical effort, than we are surely justified in believing - indeed, are obliged to believe - in an absolute and limitless functionality, in efficacy as the virtue of signs. Something is revived here of the ancient habit, prevalent in a world of magic, of inferring reality from signs. Tart of 37. Technics and Civilization (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1934; reprint, San Diego and New York: Harcourt Brace, 1963), p. 344. Page references are to the reprint edition. 57 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S the feeling of the efficacy of primitive magic has survived in the unconditional belief in progress/ writes Gilbert Simondon.38 This applies not only to technological society in a global sense but also - confusedly but tenaciously - to the everyday environment, where the most insignificant of gadgets may be the focal point of a techno-mythological realm of power. The way objects are used in everyday life implies an almost authoritarian set of assumptions about the world. And what the technical object bespeaks, no longer requiring anything more than our formal par- ticipation, is a world without effort, an abstract and completely mobile energy, and the total efficacy of sign-gestures.39 Functional Form: The Lighter All this is exemplified in the stylized fluidity of 'functional' forms. It is precisely this mental dynamic, this simulacrum of a lost symbolic relationship, that such forms connote in their striving to reinvent a teleology from signs alone. Consider the lighter shaped like a pebble which has been successfully promoted by the advertisers in the last few years. Oblong, elliptical and asymmetrical in form, it is described as 'highly functional' - not that it is better than any other lighter for lighting cigarettes, but because it is 'perfectly shaped to fit into the palm of the hand7. 'The sea has polished it to the form of the hand': it is in a finished state. Its functionality resides not in its ability to light but in its manipulability. It is as though its form was predisposed by nature (the sea) for manipulation. This new teleonomy constitutes the rhetoric of this object. The connotation here is twofold: though it is an industrial product, this lighter is supposed to have retrieved one of the qualities of the craft object in that its form is an extension of the human gesture and the human body; meanwhile, the allusion to the sea takes us into the realm of a mythical nature itself culturalized as a function of man and perfectly adapted to 38. Du mode d'existence des objets techniques (Paris: Aubier, 1958), p. 95. 39. This mythology must be distinguished from the ideology of Progress, which, abstract as it may be, is still a hypothesis about structures which is based on actual technological development. The functionalist myth, by contrast, is no more than the presumption, taken on faith from the mere testimony of signs, of the existence of a technological totality. The ideology of Progress is a socio-cultural mediation of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; the functionalist myth is an anticipatory fantasy. 58 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E man's every last desire: the sea plays the cultural role of polisher - an instance of nature's sublime craftsmanship.40 The action of sea on stone is thus echoed by the hand creating fire; the lighter becomes a miraculous flint, and a prehistoric and craftsmanly purposiveness comes into play in the very practical essence of an industrial object. Formal Connotation: Tail Fins There was a long period during which American cars were adorned by immense tail fins. For Vance Packard these perfectly symbolized the American obsession with consumer goods.41 They have other meanings, too: scarcely had it emancipated itself from the forms of earlier kinds of vehicles than the automobile-object began connoting nothing more than the result so achieved - that is to say, nothing more than itself as a victorious function. We thus witnessed a veritable triumphalism on the part of the object: the car's fins became the sign of victory over space - and they were purely a sign, because they bore no direct relationship to that victory (indeed, if anything they ran counter to it, tending as they did to make vehicles both heavier and more cumbersome). Concrete technical mobility was over-signified here as absolute fluidity. Tail fins were a sign not of real speed but of a sublime, measureless speed. They suggested a miraculous automatism, a sort of grace. It was the presence of these fins that in our imagination propelled the car, which, thanks to them, seemed to fly along of its own accord, after the fashion of a higher organism. The engine was the real efficient principle, the fins the imaginary one. Such interplay between the spontaneous and the transcendent efficacy of the object calls immedi- ately for nature symbols: cars sprout fins and are encased in fuselages - features that in other contexts are functional; first they appropriate the characteristics of the aeroplane, which is a model object relative to space, then they proceed to borrow directly from nature - from sharks, birds, and so on. 40. Mythologies of the 'natural' generally evoke an earlier cultural system as a kind of pseudo-historical reference-point in their regression to a mythical totality. Thus the mythology of pre-industrial craftsmanship implies the myth of a 'functional' nature, and vice versa. 41. See The Waste Makers (New York: David McKay, 1960). 59 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S These days connotations of the natural have shifted to a different register. Formerly we were treated to a flood of motifs from the vegetable kingdom which, as a way of naturalizing them, submerged objects and even machines in signs of the fruits of the earth.42 Now, by contrast, we are seeing the emergence of a sys- tematization based on fluidity that seeks connotations no longer in earth or flora, which are static elements, but instead in air and water, which are fluid ones, as also in the dynamic world of animals. Despite this shift from organic to fluid, however, the modern version of naturalness does still refer to nature: astructural, inessential features such as the tail fin still lend natural connotations to technical objects. It follows that such connotation is allegorical in character. When a fixed structure is invaded by astructural elements, when the object itself is overwhelmed by a formal detail, the true function is no longer anything but a pretext, and the form does no more than signify the idea of the function. In other words, the form has become allegorical. Tail fins are our modern allegory We may have no more muses, no more flowers, but we do have fins on our cars and lighters polished by the sea. It is through allegory, moreover, that the discourse of the unconscious makes itself heard. The deep-rooted phantasy of speed finds expression in tail fins, but it does so in an allusive and regressive manner. For while speed has a phallic character, the speed evoked by tail fins is merely formal, fixed, and, as it were, visually edible. Speed so apprehended is no longer the result of an active process but, rather, the result of pleasure taken in speed-in-effigy, so to speak - the final, passive state of an energy completely degraded to the level of a pure sign, to a level where unconscious desire is forever chewing over an arrested discourse. Thus formal connotation is indeed tantamount to the imposition of a censor- ship. Behind the functional self-realization of forms, traditional phallic symbolism has fallen apart: on the one hand this system has become abstract, a simulacrum of power (mechanism being concealed or indecipherable); at the same time, regres- sively and narcissistically, it is content to let itself be enveloped by forms and their 'functionality'. 42. Only curves still retain something of these vegetable and maternal overtones, tending to invest objects with the organic sense of containing. The sense, by extension, of natural evolution. They are consequently disappearing or becoming elliptical. 60 S T R U C T U R E S O F A T M O S P H E R E Vorm as Camouflage A clearer picture thus begins to emerge of the way in which forms discourse, and of the orientation of that discourse. Inasmuch as forms are relative to one another, and continually refer to other, homologous forms, they present the aspect of a finished discourse - the optimal realization of an essence of man and an essence of the world. This discourse is never innocent, however: the articulation of forms among themselves always conceals another, indirect discourse. Thus the form of the lighter relates to the form of the hand, but only by way of the sea, which 'has polished it'; and a car's tail fins relate to the distance covered only by way of the aeroplane, the shark, and so on. More precisely, it is the idea of the sea, the aeroplane or the shark that mediates. It is the Idea of Nature which, in its myriad forms (animal or veg- etable elements, the human body, space itself43), everywhere becomes involved in the articulation of forms. And to the extent that those forms constitute a system and thus re-create a kind of internal purposiveness, their reciprocal connotations are 'natural' - for nature remains the ideal point of reference of all goal-directedness. 'Vulgar' objects - objects that are nothing more than their function - embody no such purposiveness. In their case there is no justification for speaking of 'atmosphere', merely of environment. For a good while attempts were nevertheless made to endow them with a crude purposiveness: sewing machines were decorated with flowers, and it is not so long since Cocteau and Buffet could be found 'dress- ing up' refrigerators. Alternatively, if it proved impossible to 'naturalize' them, their existence would simply be concealed. After a rather brief period during which 43. The fact is that space itself has the connotation of emptiness; instead of space arising from the living inter- relationship between forms (as a space with 'rhythms'), forms are apprehended, in their relationship to each other, by way of the emptiness which is the formalized sign of space. A room containing space so understood creates a 'natural' effect: we say that it is 'airy'. This is the temptation of emptiness, as when unadorned walls indicate culture and luxury. An objet d'art may seem more precious when it is surrounded by empty space. 'Atmosphere' is thus very often created merely by a formal arrangement which 'personalizes' particular objects through the disposition of empty space. In the case of serially produced objects, conversely, a shortage of space destroys atmosphere by depriving objects of the luxury of 'breathing'. (Should we perhaps interpret this affectation of emptiness as an echo of a moral order founded on distinction and distance?) Here too, then, we find that a traditional connotation has been reversed, for fullness and substantiality once served to valorize accumulation and naïve ostentation. 61 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S machines and technology flaunted their practical nature in obscene fashion out of sheer pride at their recent emancipation, the modesty that now reigns strives vigorously to veil all the practical functions of things. We are told that 'oil heating, once installed, is absolutely invisible'. Or: 'Though it is indispensable, the garage is not supposed to catch the eye from anywhere in the garden. So it has been hidden beneath a rockery. Alpine flowers cover its concrete roof, and access to the main house from the garage is via a little door concealed in the rockery/ Naturalization, concealment, superimposition, décor - we are surrounded by objects whose form comes into play as a false answer to the self-contradictory manner in which the object is experienced. Recently disparities of décor have given way to subtler solutions. The connotation of nature, however, embedded as it is in the very discourse of forms, is still always present. The naturalizing tendency spontaneously assumes a burden of moral and psychological meanings. Here the lexicon of advertising is telling. In this discourse a whole battery of emotionally laden words such as 'warmth', 'intimacy', 'radiance' and 'honesty' - a whole rhetoric of 'natural' values - goes hand in hand with the careful calculation of forms and the promotion of 'functional style'. All the talk of warmth, honesty or faithfulness bears eloquent witness to the dubiousness of a system in which long-lost traditional values reappear as signs, in exactly the same way as the signs of shark, space or sea appeared in our earlier examples. Clearly one cannot properly speak of 'hypocrisy' here. But surely this systematic, homogeneous and functional world, with its colours, materials and forms, which at every moment, though it does not actually negate them, does disavow, deny and omit drives, desires, and all the explosive force of the instinctual life44 - surely this, too, is a moral - even a hyper-moral - world? Hypocrisy in its modern version consists not in concealing the obscenity of nature but, rather, in being satisfied (or attempting to be satisfied) by the inoffensive naturalness of signs. 44. The moral refusal of the instinctual itself signals an instinctual promiscuity. Here, by contrast, there is no more promiscuity: nature in all its forms is simultaneously signified and disavowed at the actual level of the sign. 62 Ill Conclusion: Naturalness and Functionality It will be clear from the foregoing discussion of the values of interior design and atmosphere that the entire system is founded on the concept of FUNCTIONALITY. Colours, forms, materials, design, space - all are functional. Every object claims to be functional, just as every regime claims to be democratic. The term evokes all the virtues of modernity, yet it is perfectly ambiguous. With its reference to 'function' it suggests that the object fulfils itself in the precision of its relationship to the real world and to human needs. But as our analysis has shown, 'functional' in no way qualifies what is adapted to a goal, merely what is adapted to an order or system: func- tionality is the ability to become integrated into an overall scheme. An object's functionality is the very thing that enables it to transcend its main 'function' in the direction of a secondary one, to play a part, to become a combining element, an adjustable item, within a universal system of signs. The functional system is thus characterized, in a thoroughly ambiguous way, on the one hand by a transcendence of the traditional system under its three aspects - as the primary function of the object, as drives and primary needs, and as a set of symbolic relations between the two - and on the other hand by a simultaneous disavowal of these three mutually reinforcing aspects of the traditional system. In other words: 63 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S 1. The coherence of the functional system of objects depends on the fact that these objects - along with their various properties, such as colour, form, and so on - no longer have any value of their own, but merely a universal value as signs. The order of Nature (primary functions, instinctual drives, symbolic relationships) is everywhere present in the system, but present only as signs. The materiality of objects no longer directly confronts the materiality of needs, these two inconsistent primary and antagonistic systems having been suppressed by the insertion between them of the new, abstract system of manipulable signs - by the insertion, in a word, of functionality. At the same stroke the symbolic relationship likewise disappears. What emerges from the realm of signs is a nature continuously dominated, an abstract, worked-upon nature, rescued from time and anxiety, which the sign is constantly converting into culture. This nature has been systematized: it is not so much nature as naturalness (or, equally well, 'culturalness'45). Such naturalness is thus the corollary of all functionality - and the connotation of the modern system of 'atmosphere'. 2. The always transcended presence of Nature (in a far more consistent and exhaustive fashion than in any earlier culture46) is what confers on this system its validity as a cultural model and its objective dynamism. But at the same time the always denied presence of Nature makes the system into a system of disavowal, 45. For indeed, there is no longer any antagonism here between culture and nature, save in the most formal sense, and the two are exchangeable at the level of signs. When we speak of naturalness [naturalité] and 'cul- turalness' [culturalité], the '-ness' is the important thing: the French suffix '-ité always marks the shift to an abstract, secondary meaning operating at the level of signs, as witness fin/finalité (goal / teleonomy), fonction!fonctionalité, histoire/historialité (history/historicalness), personneIpersonnalité, etc. Such words tend, therefore, to have an essential role in the analysis of systematizations, particularly in connection with the structures of connotation. They have thus cropped up a good deal already in our present discussion, and will crop up again later. [Translator's note: As may be seen from the author's examples of '-ité' words, the cognate suffix '-ity' is not used in a way that would allow this pattern of meaning to be reflected in English translation. 'Culturalité has generally been translated as 'cultural connotation7.] 46. For culture, after all, has never been anything else. But today, for the first time, at the level of everyday life, the foundation has been laid for a system whose abstractness makes it capable of completely determining objects, hence of extending its internal autonomy very widely, even to the point (and this is its teleonomy) of achieving a perfect synchrony between man and his surroundings by reducing both to simple signs and elements. 64 T H E D O M E S T I C W O R L D A N D T H E C A R lack, and camouflage (and this, too, in a way far more consistent than in all previous systems). On the one hand, then, organization and calculation; on the other, connotation and disavowal. Both flow, however, from a single function of the sign, and together they constitute the one and only reality of the functional world. A d d e n d u m : The D o m e s t i c World a n d t h e Car The discussion that we have just brought to a close has been confined in its essen- tials to the domestic environment, to the dwelling-place. The private realm of the household is indeed where the vast majority of our everyday objects are to be found. The system nevertheless extends beyond the domestic interior - notably to an external item which itself constitutes an entire dimension of it: the motorcar. The car epitomizes the object, perfectly illustrating every trait we have described: the rendering abstract of any practical goal in the interests of speed and prestige, formal connotation, technical connotation, forced differentiation, emo- tional cathexis, and projection in phantasy. Here more easily than anywhere else we may discern the collusion between the subjective system of needs and the objective system of production. I shall return to these points later. For the moment I want to emphasize the importance of the car's place within the system as a whole. The automobile is a complement to all other objects considered together; each of these in its particularity appears merely partial in comparison with the automobile - not only because it is less complex, but also because it does not occupy its own specific position in the system. Only the domestic sphere as a whole (furniture, appliances, gadgets, etc.), as structured by the major distinction between interior design and atmosphere, holds a position comparable in value, in its relative coherence, to that of the car. True, at the level of lived experience the domestic realm, with its multiplicity of tasks, functions and relationships, is far more signifi- cant than the 'realm' of car-related activity. Yet it is undeniable that at the level of the system it no longer constitutes anything more than one binary pole of the global system, the other being cars. 65 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Travel is a necessity, and speed is a pleasure. Possession of a car implies more: the driving licence is a sort of passport, a letter of credit from an aristocracy whose domain is the very latest in engine compression and speed. Disqualification from driving is surely tantamount to an excommunication, to a kind of social castration.47 Without going so far as to treat the car as a modern version of the old centaurian myth of a fusion between human intelligence and animal strength,48 one may certainly describe it as a sublime object, for it opens a parenthesis, as it were, in the everydayness of all other objects. The material that it transforms, namely space-time, cannot be compared to any other. And the dynamic synthesis of space-time that the car offers in the shape of speed is likewise radically distinct from any kind of normal function. Movement alone is the basis of a sort of happiness, but the mechanical euphoria associated with speed is something else altogether, grounded for the imagination in the miracle of motion. Effortless mobility entails a kind of pleasure that is unrealistic, a kind of suspension of existence, a kind of absence of responsibility. The effect of speed's integration of space-time is to reduce the world to two-dimensionality, to an image, stripping away its relief and its historicity and in a way ushering one into a state of sublime immobility and contemplation. 'Movement', says Schelling, 'is merely the search for repose.' Beyond a hundred kilometres per hour there is a presumption of eternity (as also, perhaps, of neurosis . . . ). Security founded on the sense of a world beyond or a world prior to this one is what nourishes car-induced euphoria, which has nothing of an active tonicity about it; rather, it is a passive satisfaction, albeit one accompanied by ever-changing scenery. This 'dynamic euphoria' serves as an antithesis to the static joys of family life and immovable property, and opens a parenthesis in social reality. Chris Marker's film Le joli mai presents the confession of one person among millions of others for whom the automobile represents a kind of no-man's-land between workplace and family home, an empty vector of pure transport: T have no more good moments,' he says, 'except for those I spend between my house and my office. I drive, I drive. 47. It has occasionally been used as a penalty for procurers. 48. On centaur mythology and phantasy projections onto horses and cars, see the discussion of 'Collecting' below. 66 T H E D O M E S T I C W O R L D A N D T H E C A R These days, though, I am not happy even then, because there is too much traffic/ It is not simply that the car rivals the house as an alternative zone of everyday life: the car, too, is an abode, but an exceptional one; it is a closed realm of intimacy, but one released from the constraints that usually apply to the intimacy of home, one endowed with a formal freedom of great intensity and a dizzying functionality Home means a regressive attachment to domestic relationships and habits, whereas the intimacy of the car arises from an accelerated space-time metabolism and, inex- tricably, from the fact that the car may at any time become the locus of an accident: the culmination in a chance event - which may in fact never occur but is always imagined, always involuntarily assumed to be inevitable - of that intimacy with oneself, that formal liberty, which is never so beautiful as in death. The car achieves an extraordinary compromise, for it makes it possible to be simultaneously at home and further and further away from home. It is thus the centre of a new kind of subjectivity, but a centre bounded by no circumference, whereas the subjectivity of the domestic world is strictly circumscribed. No other everyday object, gadget or appliance offers a sublimation or trans- figuration of this order. Every functional object is overdetermined in its power, but such overdetermination is minimal in the spheres of household management and home ownership. Moreover, the house as a whole, except to the extent that it achieves self-transcendence by virtue of status or fashion, is not a recipient or bestower of value. (In fact a basic problem for couples is the common failure of the home to catalyse any such reciprocal valorization.) As opposed to the 'horizontal' sector of everyday domestic life, cars and their speed represent a sort of 'vertical' scheme, a sort of third dimension.49 An 'aristocratic' dimension, too, in that it is free not only from the organic constraints of existence but also from social constraints. Whereas the domestic world seems to fall back to a place on the hither side of the social, cars, with their pure functionality which depends solely on the mastery of space and time, appear to deploy their virtues somewhere beyond society. Indeed, relative to the social sphere, household and motorcar partake of the same private 49. Hence the familiar reticence of the average motorist with respect to car safety devices such as belts. Safety at home is fine, but the car is from this point of view something quite different - the opposite of home, in fact. 67 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S abstractness, and the binomial they thus constitute, when it is articulated with another, that of work and leisure, frames the entirety of everyday experience. This systematic bipolarity (the car as eccentric relative to the household yet at the same time complementary to it) tends to map onto the sociological distribution of sex roles. Very often the car remains a male preserve. 'Daddy has His Peugeot/ runs one advertising slogan, 'and Mummy has HER Peugeots': the father gets the Peugeot car and the mother gets the Peugeot egg-beater, the Peugeot coffee mill and the Peugeot electric mixer.50 The family universe is a universe of foods and multifunctional appliances; as for the man, he rules over the world outside, the effective sign of which is the automobile: he himself does not appear in the picture. The same distinction thus applies both at the level of objects and at the level of roles (and in the Peugeot world, significantly enough, both levels are in evidence). This parallelism could scarcely be accidental, and indeed it corresponds to profound psychosexual determinations. We have noted that speed is at once transcendent and intimate. It implies the mastery of space qua abstract sign of the real world, and the exercise of this mastery involves narcissistic projection. Think of the 'erotic' significance of the car and of speed: by lifting social taboos and at the same time releasing us from immediate responsibility, the mobility of the car removes a whole set of resistances concerning ourselves and others: dynamism, brio, infatuation, daring - all flow from the free- dom of the driver's situation, a situation which also fosters the erotic relationship by bringing into play a dual narcissistic projection onto a single phallic object (the car) or a single objectified phallic function (speed). The eroticism of the car is therefore not that of an active sexual approach but, rather, the passive eroticism of narcissistic seductiveness in both partners, or of a shared narcissistic communion in the same object.51 The erotic significance of the object here plays the same role as the image (real or mental) in masturbation. 50. Admittedly this man-car, woman-house correlation is tending to become weaker, in reality if not at the level of representation. 51. A glimpse of this relationship of narcissistic complicity established through an object or a system of objects has recently been offered, apropos of couples, in Georges Perec's novel Les choses, une histoire des années soixante (Paris: Julliard, 1965) [English translation by Helen R. Lane: Things: A Story of the Sixties (New 68 T H E D O M E S T I C W O R L D A N D T H E C A R From this perspective it would clearly be wrong to see the motorcar as a woman-object.52 The fact that advertising always in effect does so, describing cars as compliant, racy, comfortable, practical, obedient, hot, and so on, is a symptom of the general tendency to feminize objects, the woman-object being the advertising world's most effective persuasive device and social myth. All objects, cars included, become women in order to be bought - but this is a function of the cultural system. The profound transformation of the car in phantasy is a different phenomenon altogether. Depending on the way it is used and its particular features (from the racing 'spider' to the luxurious limousine), the motorcar may equally well be invested either with the meaning of power or with the meaning of refuge: it may be a projectile or a dwelling-place. But basically, like all functional mechanical objects, it is experienced - and by everyone, men, women and children - as a phallus, as an object of manipulation, care, and fascination. The car is a projection both phallic and narcissistic, a force transfixed by its own image. We saw above, in connection with tail fins, how the car's very forms connote this unconscious discourse. York: Grove Press, 1967]. No doubt this is a normal feature of modern living-together: everything now con- spires to make objects into the fodder of relationships, and relationships themselves (whether sexual, marital, familial or microsocial) into a mere framework for the consumption of objects. 52. Some languages make it masculine, others feminine. ! . T H E N O N - F U N C T I O N A L S Y S T E M , O R S U B J E C T I V E D I S C O U R S E I Marginal Objects: Antiques There is a whole range of objects - including unique, baroque, folkloric, exotic and antique objects - that seem to fall outside the system we have been examining. They appear to run counter to the requirements of functional calculation, and answer to other kinds of demands such as witness, memory, nostalgia or escapism. It is tempting to treat them as survivals from the traditional, symbolic order. Yet for all their distinctiveness, these objects do play a part in modernity, and that is what gives them a double meaning. Atmospheric Value: Historicalness The fact is that the marginal object is not an anomaly relative to the system, for the functionality of modern objects becomes historicalness in the case of the antique object (or marginality in the baroque object, or exoticism in the primitive object) without this implying that the object ceases to function as a sign within the system. What we have here is the connotation of nature, of 'naturalness' - indeed, fundamentally we have the ultimate instantiation of that connotation, which is to be found in signs of pre- vious cultural systems. The cigarette lighter described above had a mythological dimension in its reference to the sea, but it still served a purpose; the way in which 73 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S antiques refer to the past gives them an exclusively mythological character. The antique object no longer has any practical application, its role being merely to signify. It is astructural, it refuses structure, it is the extreme case of disavowal of the primary functions. Yet it is not afunctional, nor purely 'decorative7, for it has a very specific function within the system, namely the signifying of time.1 The system of atmosphere is defined in terms of extension, yet inasmuch as it aspires to be total it must conquer all of existence, including, therefore, the essential dimension of time. Clearly it is not real time but the signs or indices of time that antiques embody.2 This allegorical presence in no way contradicts the general scheme: nature, time - nothing can escape, and everything is worked out on the level of signs. Time, however, is far less amenable than nature to abstraction and systematization. The living contradiction it enshrines resists integration into the logic of a system. This 'chronic' difficulty is what we see reflected in the spectacular connotation of the antique object. The connotation of naturalness can be subtle, but the connotation of historicalness is always glaring. The immobility of antiques has something self-conscious about it. No matter how fine it is, an antique is always eccentric; no matter how authentic it is, there is always something false about it. And indeed, it is false in so far as it puts itself forward as authentic within a system whose basic principle is by no means authenticity but, rather, the calculation of relationships and the abstractness of signs. Symbolic Value: The Myth of the Origin The antique thus has a particular status. To the extent that it is there to conjure up time as part of the atmosphere, and to the extent that it is experienced as a sign, it is simply one element among others, and relative to all others.3 On the other hand, 1. I am restricting my account to antiques because they are the clearest example of 'non-systematic' objects. Obviously this account might be applied equally well, using the same premisses, to other varieties of marginal objects. 2. Just as naturalness is basically a disavowal of nature, so historicalness is a refusal of history masked by an exaltation of the signs of history: history simultaneously invoked and denied. 3. In point of fact the antique may be perfectly integrated into structures of atmosphere, for its presence is apprehended en bloc as 'warm', in contrast to the modern environment as a whole, which is 'cold'. 74 M A R G I N A L O B J E C T S : A N T I Q U E S to the extent that it is not on a par with other objects and manifests itself as total, as an authentic presence, it enjoys a special psychological standing. It is in this respect that the antique may be said, though it serves no obvious purpose, to serve a purpose nevertheless at a deeper level. What lies behind the persistent search for old things - for antique furniture, authenticity, period style, rusticity, craftsman- ship, hand-made products, native pottery, folklore, and so on? What is the reason for the strange acculturation phenomenon whereby advanced peoples seek out signs extrinsic to their own time or space, and increasingly remote relative to their own cultural system (a phenomenon which is the converse of 'underdeveloped' peoples' attraction to the technological products and signs of the industrialized world)? The demand to which antiques respond is the demand for definitive or fully realized being.4 The tense of the mythological object is the perfect: it is that which occurs in the present as having occurred in a former time, hence that which is founded upon itself, that which is 'authentic'. The antique is always, in the strongest sense of the term, a 'family portrait': the ipimemorialization, in the concrete form of an object, of a former being - a procedure equivalent, in the register of the imaginary, to a suppression of time. This characteristic of antiques is, of course, precisely what is lacking in functional objects, which exist only in the present, in the indicative or in the practical imperative, which exhaust their possibilities in use, never having occurred in a former time, and which, though they can in varying degrees support the spatial environment, cannot support the temporal one. The functional object is efficient; the mythological object is fully realized. The fully realized event that the mythological object signifies is birth. I am not the one who is, in the present, full of angst - rather, I am the one who has been, as indicated by the course of the reverse birth of which the antique object is the sign, a course which 4. And once again my remarks should be taken as equally applicable, by extension, to exotic objects; for modern man, in any case, changing country or latitude is essentially equivalent to plunging into the past (as tourism well demonstrates). The fascination for hand-made or native products, for bazaar items from all over the globe, arises less from their picturesque variety than from the anteriority of their forms or their manufacture, and from the allusion they contain to an earlier world - invariably a throwback to the world of our childhood and its playthings. 75 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S leads from the present far back into time: a regression, therefore.5 The antique object thus presents itself as a myth of origins. 'Authenticity' It is impossible not to draw a comparison between the taste for antiques and the passion for collecting (which we shall be discussing below). There are profound affinities between the two, and in both we find the same narcissistic regression, the same way of suppressing time, the same imaginary mastery of birth and death. All the same, there are two distinctive features of the mythology of the antique object that need to be pointed out: the nostalgia for origins and the obsession with authenticity. It seems to me that both arise from the mythical evocation of birth which the antique object constitutes in its temporal closure - being born implying, after all, that one has had a father and a mother. Obviously, beating a path back to the origins means regression to the mother; the older the object, the closer it brings us to an earlier age, to 'divinity', to nature, to primitive knowledge, and so forth. According to Maurice Rheims, this kind of mystique already existed in the High Middle Ages, when a Greek bronze or intaglio covered with pagan markings could acquire magical virtues in the eyes of a ninth-century Christian. The demand for authenticity is, strictly speaking, a very different matter. It is reflected in an obsession with certainty - specifically, certainty as to the origin, date, author and signature of a work. The mere fact that a particular object has belonged to a famous or powerful individual may confer value on it. The fascination of handicraft derives from an object's having passed through the hands of someone the marks of whose labour are still inscribed thereupon: we are fascinated by what has been created, and is therefore unique, because the moment of creation cannot be reproduced. Now, the search for the traces of creation, from the actual impression of the hand to the signature, is also a search for a line of descent and for paternal transcendence. 5. Two opposed tendencies are involved here. Inasmuch as the antique is integrated into the current cultural system, it comes from the depths of time as signifier in the -present of the empty dimension of time. By contrast, the individual regression that the antique object makes possible is a movement of the present into the past, into which it projects the empty dimension of being. 76 M A R G I N A L O B J E C T S : A N T I Q U E S Authenticity always stems from the Father: the Father is the source of value here. And it is this sublime link that antiques evoke in the imagination, along with the return journey to the mother's breast. The Neo-Cultural Syndrome: Restoration The quest for authenticity (being-founded-on-itself) is thus very precisely a quest for an alibi (being-elsewhere). Let me try to shed some light on these two notions by considering a well-known example of nostalgic restoration, as described in an article entitled 'How to Fix Up Your Ruin'.6 This is what an architect does with an old farm in Tle-de-France'7 that he has taken over and decided to restore: The walls, crumbling because of the lack of foundations, were demolished. Part of the original barn at the south gable was removed to make way for a terrace. . . . Of course the three major walls were reconstructed. For the purposes of waterproofing we left a 0.7-metre space beneath tarred flagstones at ground level. . . . Neither the staircase nor the chimney was part of the original struc- ture. . . . We brought in Marseilles tile, Clamart flags, Burgundian tuiles for the roof; we built a garage in the garden and installed large French windows. . . . The kitchen is a hundred per cent modern, as is the bathroom.... HOWEVER: 'The half-timbering, which was in good condition, has been retained in the new construction'; AND: 'The stone framework of the main entrance was carefully preserved during demolition, and its stones and tiles were reused/ The article is accompanied by photographs which indeed clearly show just what is left from the old farm in the wake of 'the architect's soundings and categorical choices': three beams and two stone blocks. But on this rock would our architect build his country house - and indeed, the couple of original stones left in that entrance- way now constitute the most fitting of symbolic foundations, reinvesting the 6. 'Comment bricoler votre ruine', La maison française, May 1963. 7. [Translator's note: The author's inverted commas suggest the quaintness of the name 'Ile-de-France' at the time of writing, for this was then an archaic regional denomination with no modern administrative meaning. This changed in 1976, when the entity known as the Région Parisienne was rebaptized Ile-de-France.] 77 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S whole edifice with value. It is they which exculpate the whole enterprise from all the compromises struck by modernity with nature in order to make the place more comfortable (an innocent enough intention in itself). The architect, now trans- formed into a gentleman farmer, has in actuality built himself the modern house that he wanted all along, but modernity of itself could not invest the place with value, could not make the house into a 'dwelling-place7: true being was still lacking. Rather as a church does not become a genuinely sacred place until a few bones or relics have been enshrined in it, so this architect cannot feel at home (in the strongest sense: he cannot thoroughly rid himself of a particular kind of anxiety) until he can sense the infinitesimal yet sublime presence within his brand-new walls of an old stone that bears witness to past generations. Were it not for such witnesses, the oil heating and the garage (surmounted by its Alpine garden!) would be nothing more, sad to say, than what they are - the sad necessities of comfort. Nor is it only the functional arrangements that are exonerated by the authenticity of those old stones, but in some measure also the cultural exoticism of less important decorative elements (which are, naturally, 'in the best of taste and not in the least rustic'): opalescent lamps, straw-bottomed designer armchairs, a Dalmatian chair 'once strapped to the back of a donkey', a Romantic mirror, and so forth. The cunning of the cultural guilty conscience even leads to a curious paradox, for while the garage is concealed by a fake Alpine garden, a warming- pan introduced as a rustic accessory is described as 'there not as part of the décor but as a serviceable utensil'. 'It is used', we are assured, 'in wintertime'! So the garage's practical materiality is masked, but the warming-pan's practical essence is retrieved by means of mental acrobatics. In an oil-heated house a warming-pan is obviously quite superfluous. Yet if it is not used it will no longer be authentic, will become a mere cultural sign: the cultural, purposeless warming-pan will emerge as an all-too-faithful image of the vanity of the attempt to retrieve a natural state of affairs by rebuilding this house - and, indeed, an all-too-faithful image of the architect himself, who, fundamentally, has no part to play here, for his entire social existence lies elsewhere; his very being is elsewhere, and for him nature is nothing but a cultural luxury. Which is fair enough, so long as one can afford it. The architect, however, does not see things in that light: if the warming-pan 78 M A R G I N A L O B J E C T S : A N T I Q U E S serves no purpose, it is merely a sign of wealth, and is thus of the order of having, of status, and not of the order of being. It must therefore be declared to have some purpose, in contrast to such truly useful objects as the oil heater and the garage, which are studiously camouflaged, as though they were ineradicable blots on nature. The warming-pan is therefore genuinely mythological; so, for that matter, is the whole house (although in another sense it is totally real and functional, responding as it does to a perfectly clear desire for comfort and fresh air). By choosing not to raze the old farm and build on the site in accordance simply with his own need for comfort, by his insistence on saving old stones and beams, our architect betrays the fact that he experiences the refinement and flawless functionality of his house as inauthentic, that these characteristics do not satisfy his deepest wishes. Man is not 'at home' amid pure functionality - he requires something like that lustre of the wood of the True Cross which could make a church truly holy, some kind of talisman - a shard of absolute reality ensconced, enshrined at the heart of ordinary reality in order to justify it. Such is the role of the antique object, which always takes on the meaning, in the context of the human environment, of an embryo or mother-cell. By means of such objects a dispersed being identifies with the original and ideal situation of the embryo, retrogressing to the microcosmic yet essential state of prenatal life. These fetishized objects are therefore by no means mere accessories, nor are they merely cultural signs among others: they symbolize an inward transcendence, that phantasy of a centre-point in reality which nourishes all mythological consciousness, all individual consciousness - that phantasy whereby a projected detail comes to stand for the ego, and the rest of the world is then organized around it. The phantasy of authenticity is sublime, and it is always located somewhere short of reality (sub limina). Like the holy relic,8 whose function it secularizes, the antique object reorganizes the world in a dispersive fashion which is quite antithetical to the extensive nature of functional 8. The significance of the relic is that it makes it possible to enshrine the identity of God or that of the soul of a dead person within an object. And there is no relic without a reliquary: the value 'slides' from the one to the other, and the reliquary, often made of gold, becomes the unmistakable signifier of authenticity, and hence more effective as a symbol. 79 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S organization - such organization being the very thing, in fact, from which it seeks to protect the profound and no doubt vital lack of realism of the inner self. As symbol of the inscription of value in a closed circle and in a perfect time, mythological objects constitute a discourse no longer addressed to others but solely to oneself. Islands of legend, such objects carry human beings back beyond time to their childhood - or perhaps even farther still, back to a pre-birth reality where pure subjectivity was free to conflate itself metaphorically with its surroundings, so that those surroundings became simply the perfect discourse directed by human beings to themselves. Synchronism, Diachronism, Anachronism Within the private environment, mythological objects constitute a realm of even greater privacy: they serve less as possessions than as symbolic intercessors - as ancestors, so to speak, than which nothing is more 'private'. They are a way of escaping from everyday life, and no escape is more radical than escape in time, none so thoroughgoing as escape into one's own childhood.9 Perhaps there is something of this metaphorical escape in all aesthetic feeling, but the work of art as such calls for a rational reading, whereas the antique does not: antiques partake of 'legend', because they are defined first and foremost by their mythical quality, by their coefficient of authenticity. The antique as directly experienced is quite unaffected by period or style, whether the object is a model or whether it is serial in character, whether or not it is precious, or whether it is genuine or fake: it remains in all cases 'perfect'; it is neither internal nor external, but 'elsewhere'; neither synchronic nor diachronic, but anachronistic; relative to its possessor, it is neither the complement of a verb 'to be' nor the object of a verb 'to have', but falls, rather, into the grammatical category of an internal object that gives expression to the essence of the verb in an almost tautological manner. The functional object is devoid of being. Reality prevents its regression to that 'perfect' dimension the fact of proceeding from which suffices to ensure being. 9. Travelling as a tourist always involves going in search of lost time. 80 M A R G I N A L O B J E C T S : A N T I Q U E S This is why such objects seem so reduced, for whatever their price, merit or prestige, they configure, and must perforce continue to configure, the loss of the Father and the Mother. Rich in functionality but impoverished in meaning, their frame of reference is the present moment, and their possibilities do not extend beyond everyday life. The mythological object, on the other hand, has minimal function and maximal meaning, while its frame of reference is the ancestral realm - perhaps even the realm of the absolute anteriority of nature. On the plane of direct experience, however, the antithetical traits of the mythological and the functional coexist in complementary fashion within the one system. Our architect, for example, has both oil heating and a peasant-style warming-pan. Similarly, a literary work may be available at the same time in paperback and in a limited edition or fine binding, an electric washing machine may cohabit with an old battledore, or a functional built-in cupboard may be found cheek by jowl with a prominently displayed Spanish cabinet.10 This complementarity may even be discerned in the now common practice of dual residence, of combining a flat in the city and a house in the country.11 This duel between objects is fundamentally a duel of consciousness; it indicates a failure - and the attempt to redress that failure in a regressive fashion. In a civilization where synchronism and diachronism strive to establish systematic and exclusive control over reality, a third dimension, that of anachronism, never- theless emerges (and this as much at the level of objects as at the level of behaviours 10. We should not seek one-to-one correspondences here, however, because the functional field of modern objects is configured in quite a different way from that of antiques. Moreover, the function of antique objects in this context exists only in the sense of a function that is extinct. 11. This splitting of the traditional single home into principal and secondary - or functional and 'naturalized' - residences offers the clearest possible illustration of the systematizing process: the system splits into two in order to strike a balance between terms that are formally antithetical yet fundamentally complementary. This split affects the whole of everyday life, as witness an organization of work and leisure wherein leisure by no means transcends or even provides an outlet from productive activity: instead, a selfsame everyday reality splits into two as a means of overriding the contradictions and imposing itself as a coherent and definitive system. It is true that this process is less marked in the case of isolated objects; the fact remains that every functional object is potentially capable of splitting in this way, of becoming formally opposed to itself so as to fit more effectively into the overall system. 81 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S and social structures). This regressive dimension, though it attests to a relative setback for the system, nevertheless finds a place within that system and even, paradoxically, enables the system to function. Reverse Projection: The Technical Object and Primitive Man Naturally, this ambiguous coexistence of modern functionality and traditional 'decor' arises only after a certain level of economic development, industrial pro- duction and practical environmental saturation has been attained. Less privileged social strata (peasants, workers) and 'primitive' peoples have no interest in what is old: they aspire to the functional. All the same, there is a similarity here between 'primitive' and 'civilized' attitudes. When a 'savage' grabs a watch or a fountain pen merely because it is a 'Western' object, we find this behaviour comical or absurd, for the object is not being given its true meaning but appropriated hungrily in accordance with an infantile type of relationship involving a power phantasy. Instead of having a function, the object has a virtue: it has become a sign. Yet is this not the very same procedure of impulsive acculturation and magical appropriation that drives 'civilized' people towards sixteenth-century woodcuts or icons? In both cases what is being acquired under the form of the object is a 'virtue': the 'savage' acquires modern technology, the 'civilized' person acquires ancestral significance. The 'virtue' is not of the same order in the two instances, however. What 'under- developed' people want from the object is an image of the Father as Power - in the event, colonial power;12 what nostalgic 'civilized' people want is an image of the Father signifying birth and value. In the first case, a projective myth; in the second, a retrogressive one. A myth of power - and a myth of origins: whatever it is that man lacks is invested in the object. The 'underdeveloped' fetishize power by means of the technical object; technically advanced, 'civilized' people, for their part, fetishize birth and authenticity by means of the mythological object. 12. In the case of the child, too, objects in the environment come in the first place from the Father (and in early infancy from a phallic mother). To appropriate these objects is to appropriate the power of the Father (as Roland Barthes shows, apropos of motorcars, in 'La voiture, projection de l'ego', Réalités, no. 213, October 1963). The exercise of this power parallels the process of identification with the Father, and embraces all the conflicts this entails; consequently it is always ambiguous and partly aggressive in character. 82 M A R G I N A L O B J E C T S : A N T I Q U E S This being said, the fetishism itself is identical. In the last reckoning every antique is beautiful merely because it has survived, and thus become the sign of an earlier life. It is our fraught curiosity about our origins that prompts us to place such mythological objects, the signs of a previous order of things, alongside the functional objects which, for their part, are the signs of our current mastery. For we want at one and the same time to be entirely self-made and yet be descended from someone: to succeed the Father yet simultaneously to proceed from the Father. Perhaps mankind will never manage to choose between embarking on the Promethean project of reorganizing the world, thus taking the place of the Father, and being directly descended from an original being. Our objects bear silent witness to this unresolved ambivalence. Some serve as mediation with the present, others as mediation with the past, the value of the latter being that they address a lack. Antiques are preceded by a particle, so to speak, and their inherited nobility compensates for the premature aging of modern objects. There was a time when old people were beautiful because they were 'closer to God' and richer in experience; our technological civilization has rejected the wisdom of the old, but it bows down before the solidity of old things, whose unique value is sealed and certain. The Market in Antiques More is involved here than a snobbish and status-seeking itch of the kind evoked by Vance Packard, for example, when he describes how fashionable Bostonians install old panes of a purplish tinge in their windows: 'The defectiveness of those panes is highly cherished even when their functional value is dubious. The panes were part of a shipment of inferior glass foisted off on Americans by English glassmakers more than three centuries ago/13 Or again: 'It was found that, if a suburbanite aspires to move up into the "lower-upper class, he will buy antiques - symbols of old social position bought with new money".'14 Yet social standing may be signalled in a thousand ways (by a car, a modern detached house, etc.), so 13. The Status Seekers (New York: David McKay, 1959), p. 68. 14. Ibid. 83 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S why is the reference to the past so often chosen as a vector of status?15 All acquired value tends to metamorphose into inherited value, into a received grace. But since blood, birth and titles of nobility have lost their ideological force, the task of signi- fying transcendence has fallen to material signs - to pieces of furniture, objects, jewellery and works of art of every time and every place. The door has thus been opened to a mass of 'authoritative' signs and idols (whose authenticity, in the end, is neither here nor there); the market has been invaded by a whole magical flora of real or fake furniture, manuscripts and icons. The past in its entirety has been pressed into the service of consumption. This has even created a kind of black market. The New Hebrides, Romanesque Spain and flea markets everywhere have already been stripped clean by the voracious appetite for nostalgia and primitivism of the Western world's bourgeois interiors. Statues of the Virgin and saints are stolen from churches, paintings are stolen from museums, then this booty is sold secretly to rich people whose residences are too new to give them the kind of satisfaction they want. It is a cultural irony - but an economic fact - that this thirst for 'authenticity' can now be slaked only by forgeries. Cultural Neo-Imperialism Fundamentally, the imperialism that subjugates nature with technical objects and the one that domesticates cultures with antiques are one and the same. This same private imperialism is the organizing principle of a functionally domesticated environment made up of domesticated signs of the past - of ancestral objects, sacred in essence but desacralized, which are called upon to exude their sacredness (or historicalness) into a history-less domesticity. In this way the entire past, as a repertory of forms of consumption, is incorporated into the repertory of present-day forms in order to constitute a kind of transcendent sphere of fashion. 15. Certainly this tendency increases in a general way as people climb the social ladder, but it really takes off only once a certain status and a minimal level of "urban acculturation' have been reached. 84 Il A Marginal System: Collecting Littré's dictionary defines 'objet' in one of its meanings as 'anything which is the cause or subject of a passion; figuratively - and par excellence - the loved object'. Let us grant that our everyday objects are in fact objects of a passion - the passion for private property, emotional investment in which is every bit as intense as investment in the 'human' passions. Indeed, the everyday passion for private property is often stronger than all the others, and sometimes even reigns supreme, all other passions being absent. It is a measured, diffuse, regulating passion whose fundamental role in the vital equilibrium of the subject or the group - in the very decision to live - we tend not to gauge very well. Apart from the uses to which we put them at any particular moment, objects in this sense have another aspect which is intimately bound up with the subject: no longer simply material bodies offering a certain resistance, they become mental precincts over which I hold sway, they become things of which I am the meaning, they become my property and my passion. The Object Abstracted from Its Function If I use a refrigerator to refrigerate, it is a practical mediation: it is not an object but 85 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S a refrigerator. And in that sense I do not possess it. A utensil is never possessed, because a utensil refers one to the world; what is possessed is always an object abstracted from its function and thus brought into relationship with the subject. In this context all owned objects partake of the same abstractness, and refer to one another only inasmuch as they refer solely to the subject. Such objects together make up the system through which the subject strives to construct a world, a private totality. Every object thus has two functions - to be put to use and to be possessed. The first involves the field of the world's practical totalization by the subject, the second an abstract totalization of the subject undertaken by the subject himself outside the world. These two functions stand in inverse ratio to each other. At one extreme, the strictly practical object acquires a social status: this is the case with the machine. At the opposite extreme, the pure object, devoid of any function or completely abstracted from its use, takes on a strictly subjective status: it becomes part of a collection. It ceases to be a carpet, a table, a compass or a knick-knack and becomes an object in the sense in which a collector will say 'a beautiful object' rather than specifying it, for example, as 'a beautiful statuette'. An object no longer specified by its function is defined by the subject, but in the passionate abstractness of possession all objects are equivalent. And just one object no longer suffices: the fulfilment of the project of possession always means a succession or even a complete series of objects. This is why owning absolutely any object is always so satisfying and so disappointing at the same time: a whole series lies behind any single object, and makes it into a source of anxiety. Things are not so different on the sexual plane: whereas the love relationship has as its aim a unique being, the need to possess the love object can be satisfied only by a succession of objects, by repetition, or, alternatively, by making the assumption that all possible objects are somehow present. Only a more or less complex organization of objects, each of which refers to all the others, can endow each with an abstractness such that the subject will be able to grasp it in that lived abstractness which is the experience of possession. Collecting is precisely that kind of organization. Our ordinary environment is always ambiguous: functionality is forever collapsing into subjectivity, and 86 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G possession is continually getting entangled with utility, as part of the ever- disappointed effort to achieve a total integration. Collecting, however, offers a model here: through collecting, the passionate pursuit of possession finds fulfilment and the everyday prose of objects is transformed into poetry, into a triumphant unconscious discourse. The Object as Passion 'The taste for collection7, says Maurice Rheims, 'is a kind of passionate game/16 For children, collecting is a rudimentary way of mastering the outside world, of arrang- ing, classifying and manipulating. The most active time for childhood collecting is apparently between the ages of seven and twelve, during the latency period between early childhood and puberty. The urge to collect tends to wane with the onset of puberty, only to re-emerge as soon as that stage has passed. In later life, it is men over forty who most frequently fall victim to this passion. In short, there is in all cases a manifest connection between collecting and sexuality, and this activity appears to provide a powerful compensation during critical stages of sexual development. This tendency clearly runs counter to active genital sexuality, although it is not simply a substitute for it. Rather, as compared with genitality, it constitutes a regression to the anal stage, which is characterized by accumulation, orderliness, aggressive retention, and so on. The activity of collecting is not in any sense equivalent to a sexual practice, for it is not designed to procure instinctual satisfaction (as in fetishism, for example); it may nevertheless produce intense satisfaction as a reaction. The object here takes on the full significance of a loved object: 'Passion for the object leads to its being looked upon as a thing made by God. A collector of porcelain eggs is liable to believe that God never created a form more beautiful or more singular, and indeed that He devised this form solely for the greater delight of collectors/17 Collectors are forever saying that they are 'crazy about' this or that object, and they all without exception - even where the 16. La vie étrange des objets (Paris: Pion, 1959), p. 28. [Translator's note: There is an English translation by David Pryce-Jones: Art on the Market (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1961). I have not used it here.] 17. Ibid., p. 33. 87 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S perversion of fetishism plays no part - cloak their collection in an atmosphere of clandestineness and concealment, of secrecy and sequestration, which in every way suggests a feeling of guilt. It is this passionate involvement which lends a touch of the sublime to the regressive activity of collecting; it is also the basis of the view that anyone who does not collect something is 'nothing but a moron, a pathetic human wreck'.18 The collector's sublimity, then, derives not from the nature of the objects he collects (which will vary according to his age, profession and social milieu) but from his fanaticism. And this fanaticism is identical whether it characterizes a rich connoisseur of Persian miniatures or a collector of matchboxes. The distinction that may legitimately be drawn here, to the effect that the collector loves his objects on the basis of their membership in a series, whereas the connoisseur loves his on account of their varied and unique charm, is not a decisive one. In both cases gratification flows from the fact that possession depends, on the one hand, on the absolute singularity of each item, a singularity which puts that item on a par with an animate being - indeed, fundamentally on a par with the subject himself - and, on the other hand, on the possibility of a series, and hence of an infinite play of substitutions. Collecting is thus qualitative in its essence and quantitative in its practice. If the feeling of possession is based on a confusion of the senses (of hand and eye) and an intimacy with the privileged object, it is also based just as much on searching, ordering, playing and assembling. In short, there is something of the harem about collecting, for the whole attraction may be summed up as that of an intimate series (one term of which is at any given time the favourite) combined with a serial intimacy Man never comes so close to being the master of a secret seraglio as when he is surrounded by his objects. Human relationships, home of uniqueness and conflict, never permit any such fusion of absolute singularity with infinite seriality - which is why they are such a continual source of anxiety. By contrast, the sphere of objects, consisting of successive and homologous terms, reassures. True, such 18. M. Fauron, president of the cigar-band collectors' association, in Liens (review of the Club français du Livre), May 1964. 88 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M C O L L E C T I N G reassurance is founded on an illusion, a trick, a process of abstraction and regres- sion, but no matter. In the words of Maurice Rheims: Tor man, the object is a sort of insentient dog which accepts his blandishments and returns them after its own fashion, or rather which returns them like a mirror faithful not to real images but to images that are desired/19 The Finest of Domestic Animals Rheims's dog image is the right one, for pets are indeed an intermediate category between human beings and objects. The pathos-laden presence of a dog, a cat, a tortoise or a canary is a testimonial to a failure of the interhuman relationship and an attendant recourse to a narcissistic domestic universe where subjectivity finds fulfilment in the most quietistic way. Note, by the way, that these animals are not sexed (indeed, they are often neutered for their role as household pets); they are every bit as devoid of sex, even though they are alive, as objects are. This is the price to be paid if they are to provide emotional security: only their actual or symbolic castration makes it possible for them to serve as mitigators of their owners' castration anxiety. This is a part that all the objects that surround us also play to perfection. The object is in fact the finest of domestic animals - the only 'being' whose qualities exalt rather than limit my person. In the plural, objects are the only entities in existence that can genuinely coexist, because the differences between them do not set them against one another, as happens in the case of living beings: instead they all converge submissively upon me and accumulate with the greatest of ease in my consciousness. Nothing can be both 'personalized' and quantified so easily as objects. Moreover, this subjective quantifiability is not restricted: everything can be possessed, cathected or (in the activity of collecting) organized, classified and assigned a place. The object is thus in the strict sense of the word a mirror, for the images it reflects can only follow upon one another without ever contradicting one another. And indeed, as a mirror the object is perfect, precisely because it sends back not real images, but desired ones. In a 19. Rheims, La vie étrange des objets, p. 50. 89 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S word, it is a dog of which nothing remains but faithfulness. What is more, you can look at an object without it looking back at you. That is why everything that cannot be invested in human relationships is invested in objects. That is why regression of this kind is so easy, why people so readily practise this form of 'retreat'. But we must not allow ourselves to be taken in by this, nor by the vast literature that sentimentalizes inanimate objects. The 'retreat' involved here really is a regression, and the passion mobilized is a passion for flight. Objects undoubtedly serve in a regulatory capacity with regard to everyday life, dissipating many neuroses and providing an outlet for all kinds of tensions and for energies that are in mourning. This is what gives them their 'soul7, what makes them 'ours' - but it is also what turns them into the décor of a tenacious mythology, the ideal décor for an equilibrium that is itself neurotic. A Serial Game Yet this mediation would seem to be a poor one. How can consciousness let itself be fooled in this way? Such is the cunning of subjectivity: an object that is possessed can never be a poor mediation. It is always absolutely singular. Not in reality, of course: the possession of a 'rare' or 'unique' object is obviously the ideal aim of its appropriation, but for one thing the proof that a given object is unique can never be supplied in a real world, and, for another, consciousness gets along just fine without proof. The particular value of the object, its exchange value, is a function of cultural and social determinants. Its absolute singularity, on the other hand, arises from the fact of being possessed by me - and this allows me, in turn, to recognize myself in the object as an absolutely singular being. This is a grandiose tautology, but one that gives the relationship to objects all its density - its absurd facility, and the illusory but intense gratification it supplies.20 What is more, while this closed circuit may also govern human relationships (albeit less easily), the relationship with objects has one characteristic that can never be found in the intersubjective realm: no object ever opposes the extension of the process of 20. It also creates disillusion, of course, itself bound up with the tautological character of the system. 90 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G narcissistic projection to an unlimited number of other objects; on the contrary, the object imposes that very tendency, thereby contributing to the creation of a total environment, to that totalization of images of the self that is the basis of the miracle of collecting. For what you really collect is always yourself. This makes it easier to understand the structure of the system of possession: any collection comprises a succession of items, but the last in the set is the person of the collector. Reciprocally, the person of the collector is constituted as such only if it replaces each item in the collection in turn. An analogous structure on the sociological level is to be found in the system of model and series: both the series and the collection serve to institute possession of the object - that is, they facilitate the mutual integration of object and person.21 From Quantity to Quality: The Unique Object It may well be objected here that any exclusive passion for a single object on the part of an art lover suffices to demolish our hypothesis. It is quite clear, however, that the unique object is in fact simply the final term, the one which sums up all the others, that it is the supreme component of an entire paradigm (albeit a virtual, invisible or implicit one) - that it is, in short, the emblem of the series. In the portraits in which he illustrates the passion of curiosity, La Bruyère puts the following words into the mouth of a collector of fine prints: T suffer from a grave affliction which will surely oblige me to abandon all thought of prints till the end of my days: I have all of Callot except for one - and one which, to be frank, is not among his best works. Indeed, it is one of his worst, yet it would round out 21. The series is practically always a kind of game that makes it possible to select any one term and invest it with the privileged status of a model A child is throwing bottle-tops: which one will go the farthest? It is no coincidence if the same one always comes out ahead: this is his favourite. The model he thus constructs, the hierarchy he sets up, is in fact himself - for he does not identify himself with one bottle-top but, rather, with the fact that one bottle-top always wins. And he is just as present in each of the other tops, unmarked terms in the antagonism between winner and losers: throwing the bottle-tops one by one is playing at constituting oneself as a series in order then to constitute oneself as a model. Here, in a nutshell, is the psychology of the collector; and a collector who collects only privileged or 'unique' objects is simply making sure that he himself is the object that always wins. 91 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Callot for me. I have searched high and low for this print for twenty years, and I now despair of ever finding it/ The equivalence experienced here between the whole series minus one and the final term missing from the series is conveyed with arithmetical certainty.22 The absent final term is a symbolic distillation of that series without which it would not exist; consequently it acquires a strange quality, a quality which is the quintessence of the whole quantitative calibration of the series. This term is the unique object, defined by its final position and hence creating the illusion that it embodies a particular goal or end. This is all well and good, but it shows us how it is quantity that impels towards quality, and how the value thus concentrated on this simple signifier is in fact indistinguishable from the value that infuses the whole chain of intermediate signifiers of the paradigm. This is what might be called the symbolism of the object, in the etymological sense (cf. Greek sumballein, to put together), in accordance with which a chain of signifiers may be summed up in just one of its terms. The object is the symbol not of some external agency or value but first and foremost of the whole series of objects of which it is the (final) term. (This in addition to symbolizing the person whose object it is.) La Bruyère7s example illustrates another rule, too: that the object attains exceptional value only by virtue of its absence. This is not simply a matter of covetousness. One cannot but wonder whether collections are in fact meant to be completed, whether lack does not play an essential part here - a positive one, more- over, as the means whereby the subject reapprehends his own objectivity. If so, the presence of the final object of the collection would basically signify the death of the subject, whereas its absence would be what enables him merely to rehearse his death (and so exorcize it) by having an object represent it. This lack is experienced as suffering, but it is also the breach that makes it possible to avoid completing the collection and thus definitively erasing reality. Let us therefore applaud La Bruyère's collector for never finding his last Callot, for if he had done so he would thereby have ceased to be the living and passionate man that he still was, after all. 22. Any term in the series may become the final term: any Callot can be the one to 'round out Callot'. 92 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G It might be added that madness begins once a collection is deemed complete and thus ceases to centre around its absent term. This account of things is buttressed by another story told by Maurice Rheims. A bibliophile specializing in unique copies learns one day that a New York book- seller is offering a book that is identical to one of his prize possessions. He rushes to New York, acquires the book, summons a lawyer, has the offending second copy burnt before him and elicits an affidavit substantiating this act of destruction. Once he is back home, he inserts this legal document in his copy, now once again unique, and goes to bed happy. Should we conclude that in this case the series has been abolished? Not at all. It only seems so, because the collector's original copy was in fact invested with the value of all virtual copies, and by destroying the rival copy the book collector was merely reinstituting the perfection of a compromised symbol. Whether denied, forgotten, destroyed, or merely virtual, the series is still present. The serial nature of the most mundane of everyday objects, as of the most transcendent of rarities, is what nourishes the relationship of ownership and the possibility of passionate play: without seriality no such play would be conceivable, hence no possession - and hence, too, properly speaking, no object. A truly unique, absolute object, an object such that it has no antecedents and is in no way dispersed in some series or other - such an object is unthinkable. It has no more existence than a pure sound. Just as harmonic series bring sounds up to their perceived quality, so paradigmatic series, whatever their degree of complexity, bring objects up to their symbolic quality - carrying them, in the same movement, into the sphere of the human relationship of mastery and play. Objects and Habits: Wrist-Watches Every object oscillates between a practical specificity, a function which is in a sense its manifest discourse, and absorption by a series or collection where it becomes one term in a latent, repetitive discourse - the most basic and tenacious of discourses. This discursive system of objects is analogous to the system of habits.23 23. Moreover, any object immediately becomes the foundation of a network of habits, the focus of a set of behavioural routines. Conversely, there is probably no habit that does not centre on an object. In everyday existence the two are inextricably bound up with each other. 93 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Habits imply discontinuity and repetition - not continuity, as common usage suggests. By breaking up time, our 'habitual' patterns dispel the anxiety-provoking aspect of the temporal continuum and of the absolute singularity of events. Similarly, it is thanks to their discontinuous integration into series that we put objects at our sole disposition, that we own them. This is the discourse of subjec- tivity itself, and objects are a privileged register of that discourse. Between the world's irreversible evolution and ourselves, objects interpose a discontinuous, classifiable, reversible screen which can be reconstituted at will, a segment of the world which belongs to us, responding to our hands and minds and delivering us from anxiety. Objects do not merely help us to master the world by virtue of their integration into instrumental series, they also help us, by virtue of their integration into mental series, to master time, rendering it discontinuous and classifying it, after the fashion of habits, and subjecting it to the same associational constraints as those which govern the arrangement of things in space. There is no better illustration of this discontinuous and 'habitual' function than the wrist-watch.24 The watch epitomizes the duality of the way we experience objects. On the one hand, it tells us the actual time; and Chronometrie precision is par excellence the dimension of practical constraints, of society as external to us, and of death. As well as subjecting us to an irreducible temporality, however, the watch as an object helps us to appropriate time: just as the automobile 'eats up' miles, so the watch-object eats up time.25 By making time into a substance that can be divided up, it turns it into an object to be consumed. A perilous dimension of praxis is thus transformed into a domesticated quantity. Beyond just knowing the time, 'possessing' the time in and through an object that is one's own, having the time continuously recorded before one's eyes, has become a crutch, a necessary reassurance, for civilized man. The time is no longer in the home, no longer the clock's beating heart, but its registration on the wrist continues to ensure the same 24. The watch is also indicative (as is the disappearance of clocks) of the irresistible tendency of modern objects towards miniaturization and individualization. It is also the oldest, the smallest, the closest to us, and the most valuable of personal machines - an intimate and highly cathected mechanical talisman which becomes the object of everyday complicity, fascination (especially for children), and jealousy. 25. Exactness about time parallels speed in space: time has to be gobbled up as completely as possible. 94 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G organic satisfaction as the regular throbbing of an internal organ. Thanks to my watch, time presents itself simultaneously as the very dimension of my objectifica- tion and as a simple household necessity. As a matter of fact, any object might be used to demonstrate how even the dimension of objective constraint is incor- porated by everyday experience; the watch, however, is the best example, by virtue of its explicit relationship to time. Objects and Time: A Controlled Cycle The problem of time is a fundamental aspect of collecting. As Maurice Rheims says: 'A phenomenon that often goes hand in hand with the passion for collecting is the loss of any sense of the present time/26 But is this really just a matter of an escape into nostalgia? Certainly, someone who identifies with Louis XVI down to the feet of his armchairs, or develops a true passion for sixteenth-century snuffboxes, is marking himself off from the present by means of a historical reference, yet this reference takes second place to his direct experience of collecting's systematic aspect. The deep-rooted power of collected objects stems neither from their uniqueness nor from their historical distinctiveness. It is not because of such considerations that the temporality of collecting is not real time but, rather, because the organization of the collection itself replaces time. And no doubt this is the collection's fundamental func- tion: the resolving of real time into a systematic dimension. Taste, particularity, status, the discourse of society - any of these may cause the collection to open onto a broader relationship (though this will never go beyond a group of insiders); in all cases, however, the collection must remain, literally, a 'pastime'. Indeed, it abolishes time. More precisely, by reducing time to a fixed set of terms navigable in either direc- tion, the collection represents the continual recommencement of a controlled cycle whereby man, at any moment and with complete confidence, starting with any term and sure of returning to it, is able to set his game of life and death in motion. It is in this sense that the environment of private objects and their possession (collection being the most extreme instance) is a dimension of our life which, though 26. La vie étrange des objets, p. 42. 95 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S imaginary is absolutely essential. Just as essential as dreams. It has been said that if dreams could be experimentally suppressed, serious mental disturbances would quickly ensue. It is certainly true that were it possible to deprive people of the regressive escape offered by the game of possession, if they were prevented from giving voice to their controlled, self-addressed discourse, from using objects to recite themselves, as it were, outside time, then mental disorder would surely follow immediately, just as in the case of dream deprivation. We cannot live in absolute singularity, in the irreversibility signalled by the moment of birth, and it is precisely this irreversible movement from birth towards death that objects help us to cope with. Of course the balance thus achieved is a neurotic one; of course this bulwark against anxiety is regressive, for time is objectively irreversible, after all, and even the objects whose function it is to protect us from it are perforce themselves carried off by it; and of course the defence mechanism that imposes discontinuity by means of objects is forever being contested, for the world and human beings are in reality continuous. But can we really speak here in terms of normality or anomaly? Taking refuge in a closed synchronicity may certainly be deemed denial of reality and flight if one considers that the object is the recipient of a cathexis that 'ought' to have been invested in human relationships. But this is the price we pay for the vast regulating power of these mechanisms, which today, with the disappearance of the old reli- gious and ideological authorities, are becoming the consolation of consolations, the everyday mythology absorbing all the angst that attends time, that attends death. It should be clear that we are not here promoting any spontaneous mythology according to which man somehow extends his life or survives his death by means of the objects he possesses. The refuge-seeking procedure I have been describing depends not on an immortality, an eternity or a survival founded on the object qua reflection (something which man has basically never believed in) but, rather, on a more complex action which 'recycles' birth and death into a system of objects. What man gets from objects is not a guarantee of life after death but the possibility, from the present moment onwards, of continually experiencing the unfolding of his existence in a controlled, cyclical mode, symbolically transcending a real existence the irreversibility of whose progression he is powerless to affect. 96 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G We are not far from the ball which the child (in Freud's account) causes to disappear and reappear in order to experience the absence and presence of its mother alternately (Fort! Da! Fort! Da!) - in order to counter her anxiety-provoking absence with this infinite cycle of disappearance and reappearance of the object. The symbolic implications of play within the series are not hard to discern here, and we may sum them up by saying that the object is the thing with which we construct our mourning: the object represents our own death, but that death is transcended (sym- bolically) by virtue of the fact that we possess the object; the fact that by introjecting it into a work of mourning - by integrating it into a series in which its absence and its re-emergence elsewhere 'work' at replaying themselves continually, recurrently - we succeed in dispelling the anxiety associated with absence and with the reality of death. Objects allow us to apply the work of mourning to ourselves right now, in everyday life, and this in turn allows us to live - to live regressively, no doubt, but at least to live. A person who collects is dead, but he literally survives himself through his collection, which (even while he lives) duplicates him infinitely, beyond death, by integrating death itself into the series, into the cycle. Once again the parallel with dreams applies here. If any object's function - practical, cultural or social - means that it is the mediation of a wish, it is also, as one term among others in the systematic game that we have been describing, the voice of desire. Desire is, in fact, the motor of the repetition or substitution of oneself, along the infinite chain of signifiers, through or beyond death. And if the function of dreams is to ensure the continuity of sleep, that of objects, thanks to very much the same sort of compromise, is to ensure the continuity of life.27 27. A story told by Tristan Bernard provides an amusing illustration of the fact that collecting is a way of play- ing with death (that is, a passion), and in consequence stronger, symbolically, than death itself. There was once a man who collected children: legitimate, illegitimate, children of a first or a second marriage, foundlings, by-blows, and so on. One day he gave a house party at which his entire 'collection' were present: a cynical friend of his remarked, however, 'There is one kind of child you do not have.' 'What type?' the host wanted to know. 'A posthumous child/ came the answer. Whereupon this passionate collector first got his wife pregnant and promptly thereafter committed suicide. The same system is to be found, minus the narrative trappings, in games of chance. This is the reason for their fascination, which is even more intense than that of collecting. Such games imply a pure transcendence of death: subjectivity cathects the pure series with an imaginary mastery, quite certain that whatever the ups and downs of the play, no one has the power to reintroduce into it the real conditions of life and death. 97 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S The Sequestered Object: Jealousy At the terminal point of its regressive movement, the passion for objects ends up as pure jealousy. The joy of possession in its most profound form now derives from the value that objects can have for others and from the fact of depriving them thereof. This jealous complex, though it is characteristic of the collector at his most fanatical, presides also, proportionately speaking, over the simplest proprietary reflex. A powerful anal-sadistic impulse, it produces the urge to sequester beauty so as to be the only one to enjoy it: a kind of sexually perverse behaviour widely present in a diffuse form in the relationship to objects. What does the sequestered object represent? (Its objective value is secondary, of course - its attraction lies in the very fact of its confinement.) If you do not lend your car, your fountain pen or your wife to anyone, that is because these objects, according to the logic of jealousy, are narcissistic equivalents of the ego: to lose them, or for them to be damaged, means castration. The phallus, to put it in a nut- shell, is not something one loans out. What the jealous owner sequesters and cleaves to is his own libido, in the shape of an object, which he is striving to exorcize by means of a system of confinement - the same system, in fact, by virtue of which collecting dispels anxiety about death. He castrates himself out of anguish about his own sexuality; or, more exactly, he uses a symbolic castration - sequestration - pre-emptively, as a way of countering anxiety about real castration.28 This desperate strategy is the basis of the horrible gratification that jealousy affords. For one is always jealous of oneself. It is oneself that one locks up and guards so closely. And it is from oneself that one obtains gratification. Obviously, this jealous pleasure occurs in a context of absolute disillusion- ment, because systematic regression can never completely eradicate consciousness of the real world or of the futility of such behaviour. The same goes for collecting, whose sway is fragile at best, for the sway of the real world lies ever just behind it, and is continually threatening it. Yet this disillusionment is itself part of the system 28. Of course this also goes for pets, and by extension for the 'object' in the sexual relationship, whose manip- ulation in jealousy is of a similar kind. 98 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M C O L L E C T I N G - indeed, is as responsible as satisfaction for setting the system in motion: disillu- sionment never refers to the world but, rather, to an ulterior term; disillusionment and satisfaction occupy sequential positions in the cycle. The neurotic activation of the system is thus attributable to this constitutive disillusionment. In such cases the series tends to run its course at a faster and faster pace, chasing its tail as differences wear out and the substitution mechanism speeds up. The system may even enter a destructive phase, implying the self-destruction of the subject. Maurice Rheims evokes the ritualized 'execution' of collections - a kind of suicide based on the impossibility of ever circumscribing death. It is not rare in the context of the system of jealousy for the subject eventually to destroy the sequestered object or being out of a feeling that he can never completely rid himself of the adversity of the world, and of his own sexuality. This is the logical and illogical end of his passion.29 The Object Destructured: Perversion The effectiveness of the system of possession is directly linked to its regressive character. And this regression in turn is linked to the very modus operandi of perversion. If perversion as it concerns objects is most clearly discernible in the crystallized form of fetishism, we are perfectly justified in noting how throughout the system, organized according to the same aims and functioning in the same ways, the possession of objects and the passion for them is, shall we say, a tempered mode of sexual perversion. Indeed, just as possession depends on the discontinuity of the series (real or virtual) and on the choice of a privileged term within it, so sexual perversion is founded on the inability to apprehend the other qua object of desire in his or her unique totality as a person, to grasp the other in any but a discontinuous way: the other is transformed into the paradigm of various eroticized parts of the body, a single one of which becomes the focus of objectification. A particular 29. We must not confuse disillusionment, an internal motor of the regressive system of the series, with the lack we spoke of above, which on the contrary tends to foster emergence from the system. Disillusionment causes the subject to tighten his retrogressive embrace of the series; lack causes him to evolve (relatively speaking) in the direction of the outside world. 99 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S woman is no longer a woman but merely a sex, breasts, belly, thighs, voice and face - and preferably just one of them.30 She thus becomes a constituent 'object' in a series whose different terms are gazetted by desire, and whose real referent is by no means the loved person but, rather, the subject himself, collecting and eroticizing himself and turning the relationship of love into a discourse directed towards him alone. The opening sequence in Jean-Luc Godard's film Contempt clearly illustrates this. The dialogue in this 'nude' scene goes as follows. 'Do you love my feet?' the woman asks. (Note that throughout the scene she is inventorying herself in a mirror - this is not irrelevant, because in this way she attributes value to herself as she is seen, via her image, and thus, already, as spatially discontinuous.) 'Yes, I love them/ 'Do you love my legs?' 'Yes.' 'And my thighs?' 'Yes,' he replies once more. 'I love them.' (And so on, from foot to head, ending up with her hair.) 'So, you love me totally?' 'Yes, I love you totally.' 'Me too, Paul/ she says, summing up the situation. It may be that the film's makers saw all this as the clarifying algebra of a demystified love. Be that as it may, such a grotesque reconstruction of desire is the height of inhumanity. Once broken down by body parts into a series, the woman as pure object is then reintegrated into the greater series of all woman-objects, where she is merely one term among others. The only activity possible within the logic of this system is the play of substitutions. This was what we recognized earlier as the motor of satisfaction in the collector. 30. The regressive tendency, ever more specialized and impersonal, may converge on the hair or the feet, or, ultimately, crystallize - at the opposite pole to any living being - on a garter or a brassiere; we thus come back to the material object, whose possession may be described as the perfect way of eliminating the presence of the other. 100 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G In the love relationship the tendency to break the object down into discrete details in accordance with a perverse autoerotic system is slowed by the living unity of the other person.31 When it comes to material objects, however, and especially to manufactured objects complex enough to lend themselves to mental dismantling, this tendency has free rein. With the automobile, for instance, it is possible to speak of 'my brakes', 'my tail fins', 'my steering wheel'; or to say '1 am braking', 'I am turning' or 'I am starting'. In short, all the car's 'organs' and func- tions may be brought separately into relation with the person of the owner in the possessive mode. We are dealing here not with a process of personalization at the social level but with a process of a projective kind. We are concerned not with having but with being. With the horse, despite the fact that this animal was a remarkable instrument of power and transcendence for man, this kind of confusion was never possible. The fact is that the horse is not made of pieces - and above all, that it is sexed. We can say 'my horse' or 'my wife', but that is as far as this kind of possessive denomination can go. That which has a sex resists fragmenting projection and hence also the mode of appropriation that we have identified as a perversion.32 Faced by a living being, we may say 'my' but we cannot say T as we do when we symbolically appropriate the functions and 'organs' of a car. That type of regression is not available to us. The horse may be the recipient of power- ful symbolic cathexes: we associate it with the wild sexuality of the rutting season, as with the wisdom of the centaur; its head is a terrifying phantasy linked to the image of the father, yet its calm embodies the protective strength of Cheiron the teacher. It is never cathected, however, in the simplistic, narcissistic, far more impoverished and infantile manner in which the ego is projected onto structural details of cars (in accordance with an almost delusional analogy with disassociated parts and functions of the human body). The existence of a dynamic symbolism of the horse may be attributed precisely to the fact that isolated identifications with 31. This explains why the passionate feelings are transferred to the fetish, whose function is a radical simpli- fication of the living sexual object which makes this object equivalent to the penis and cathects it accordingly. 32. By the same token possessive identification operates in the case of living beings only to the extent that such beings may be perceived as asexual: 'Does our head hurt?', we may say to a baby. When we are confronted by a sexed being, however, this kind of confusional identification is halted by castration anxiety. 101 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S distinct functions or organs of the horse are an impossibility; nor is there any prospect, therefore, of collapsing this relationship into an autoerotic 'discourse' concerned with disconnected elements. Fragmentation and regression of that kind presuppose a technique, but one which has become autonomous at the level of the part-object. A woman broken down into a syntagma of erogenous zones is classified exclusively by the functionality of pleasure, to which the response is an objectivizing and ritualizing erotic technique that masks the anxiety associated with the interpersonal relationship while at the same time serving as a genuine (gestural and effective) dose of reality at the very heart of perversion as a phantasy system. The fact is that every mental system needs a credibility factor of this sort - a foothold in the real, a technical rationale or justifi- cation. Thus the accelerator referred to in the words T am accelerating7, or the whole car implied when we say 'my car', serves as the real, technical justification for a whole realm of narcissistic annexation short of reality. The same goes for erotic technique, when it is accepted for what it is; for at this level we are no longer in the genital sphere, which opens onto reality, onto pleasure, but, rather, in a regressive, anal sphere of sexual systematizing for which erotic gestures are merely the justification. Clearly, then, 'technical' is a very long way indeed from implying 'objective'. Technique does have this quality when it is socialized, when it is adopted by tech- nology, and when it informs new structures. In the everyday realm, however, it constitutes a field that is always hospitable to regressive phantasies, because the possibility of a destructuring is ever imminent. Once assembled and mounted, the components of a technical object imply a certain coherence. But such a structure is always vulnerable to the human mind: held together from without by its function, it is purely formal for the psyche. The hierarchy of its elements can be dismantled at any time, and those elements made interchangeable within a paradigmatic system which the subject uses for his self-recitation. The object is discontinuous already - and certainly easy for thought to disassemble. Moreover, the task is all the easier now that the object - especially the technical object - is no longer lent unity by a set of human gestures and by human energy. Another reason why the car, in contrast to the horse, is such a perfect object for the purposes of narcissistic manipulation is that mastery over the horse is muscular and active, and calls for a gestural system 102 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G designed to maintain balance, whereas mastery over a car is simplified, functional and abstract. From Serial Motivation to Real Motivation Hitherto our discussion has paid no heed whatsoever to the actual nature of the objects that are collected: we have concentrated on the systematic aspects of collecting and ignored the thematic. It is obvious, however, that collecting masterpieces is not exactly the same thing as collecting cigar bands. First of all, a distinction must be drawn between the concept of collection (Latin colligere, to choose and gather together) and the concept of accumulation. At the simplest level, matter of one kind or another is accumulated: old papers are piled up, or quantities of food are stored. This activity falls somewhere between oral introjection and anal retention. At a somewhat higher level lies the serial accumulation of identical objects. As for collecting proper, it has a door open onto culture, being concerned with differentiated objects which often have exchange value, which may also be 'objects' of preservation, trade, social ritual, exhibition - perhaps even generators of profit. Such objects are accompanied by projects. And though they remain inter- related, their interplay involves the social world outside, and embraces human relationships. However powerful external motivations may be, collections can never escape from their internal systematization; at best they may represent a compromise between internal and external factors, and even when a collection transforms itself into a discourse addressed to others, it continues to be first and foremost a discourse addressed to oneself. Serial motivation is discernible everywhere. Research shows that buyers of books published in series (such as 10/28 or Que sais-je?33), once they are caught up in collecting, will even acquire titles of no interest to them: the distinctiveness of the book relative to the series itself thus suffices to create a purely formal interest which replaces any real one. The motive of purchase is nothing but 33. [Translator's note: These are well-known series of pocket books in uniform format. Que sais-je? is a series of short monographs on a vast array of topics.] 103 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S this contingent association. A comparable kind of behaviour is that of people who cannot read comfortably unless they are surrounded by all their books; in such cases the specificity of what is being read tends to evaporate. Even farther down the same path, the book itself may count less than the moment when it is put back in its proper place on the shelf. Conversely, once a collector's enthusiasm for a series wanes it is very difficult to revive, and now he may not even buy volumes of genuine interest to him. This is as much evidence as we need to draw a clear distinction between serial motivation and real motivation. The two are mutually exclusive and can coexist only on the basis of compromise, with a notable tendency, founded on inertia, for serial motivation to carry the day over the dialectical motivation of interest.34 Mere collecting, however, may sometimes create real interest. The person who sets out to buy every title in the Que sais-je? series may end up confining his col- lection to a single subject, such as music or sociology. Once a certain quantitative threshold is reached, sheer accumulation may occasionally give way to a measure of discrimination. There is no hard-and-fast rule here. Artistic masterpieces may be collected with the same regressive fanaticism as cheese labels; on the other hand, children who collect stamps are continually swapping them with their friends. No iron-clad connection exists, therefore, between a collection's thematic complexity and its real openness to the outside world. At best such complexity may give us a clue, may be grounds for a presumption of openness. A collection can emancipate itself from unalloyed accumulation not only by virtue of its cultural complexity but also by virtue of what is missing from it, by virtue of its incompleteness. A lack here is always a specific demand, an appeal for such and such an absent object. And this demand, in the shape of research, 34. This distinction between serial satisfaction and pleasure proper is an essential one. True pleasure is a sort of pleasure-in-pleasure whereby mere satisfaction is transcended as such, and grounds itself in a relationship. In serial satisfaction, by contrast, this second-level pleasure, this qualitative dimension of pleasure, dis- appears, is missing or unfulfilled. Satisfaction must depend on linear succession alone: an unattainable totality is extended by means of projection and compensated for by means of repetition. People stop reading the books they buy, then proceed to buy more and more. Similarly the repetition of the sexual act, or a multiplicity of sexual partners, may serve indefinitely as an ersatz form of love as exploration. Pleasure in pleasure is gone, only satisfaction remains - and the two are mutually exclusive. 104 A M A R G I N A L S Y S T E M : C O L L E C T I N G passion, or messages to other people,35 suffices to shatter that fatal enchantment of the collector which plunges him into a state of pure fascination. A recent television programme on collecting made the point well: every collector who presented his collection to the viewing audience would mention the very special 'object7 that he did not have, and invite everyone to find it for him. So, even though objects may on occasion lead into the realm of social discourse, it must be acknowledged that it is usually not an object's presence but far more often its absence that clears the way for social intercourse. A Discourse Addressed to Oneself It remains characteristic of the collection that sooner or later a radical change will occur capable of wrenching it out of its regressive system and orientating it towards a project or task (whether status-related, cultural or commercial is of no consequence, just so long as an object eventually brings one human being face to face with another - at which point the object has become a message). All the same, no matter how open a collection is, it will always harbour an irreducible element of non-relationship to the world. Because he feels alienated and abolished by a social discourse whose rules escape him, the collector strives to reconstitute a discourse that is transparent to him, a discourse whose signifiers he controls and whose referent par excellence is himself. In this he is doomed to failure: he cannot see that he is simply transforming an open-ended objective discontinuity into a closed subjective one, where even the language he uses has lost any general validity. This kind of totalization by means of objects always bears the stamp of solitude. It fails to communicate with the outside, and communication is missing within it. In point of fact, moreover, we cannot avoid the question whether objects can indeed ever come to constitute any other language than this: can man ever use objects to set up a language that is more than a discourse addressed to himself? 35. Even in this case, however, the collector tends to call upon other people solely as observers of his collection, integrating them as third parties only in an already constituted subject-object relationship. 105 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S The collector is never an utterly hopeless fanatic, precisely because he collects objects that in some way always prevent him from regressing into the ultimate abstraction of a delusional state, but at the same time the discourse he thus creates can never - for the very same reason - get beyond a certain poverty and infantilism. Collecting is always a limited, repetitive process, and the very material objects with which it is concerned are too concrete and too discontinuous ever to be articulated as a true dialectical structure.36 So if non-collectors are indeed 'nothing but morons', collectors, for their part, invariably have something impoverished and inhuman about them. 36. As distinct from science or memory, for example - which also involve collecting, but the collecting of facts or knowledge. 106 C . T H E M E T A F U N C T I O N A L A N D D Y S F U N C T I O N A L S Y S T E M : G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S We have now considered objects from the point of view of their objective system- atization (interior design and atmosphere) and from that of their subjective systematization (collecting). Let us next turn our attention to their connotations - and hence to their ideological significance. Technical Connotation: Automatism If formal connotation is summed up in the word FASHION,1 technical connotation is epitomized by the notion of AUTOMATISM, which is the major concept of the modern object's mechanistic triumphalism, the ideal of its mythology. What automatism means is that the object, in its particular function, takes on the connotation of an absolute.2 An example borrowed from Gilbert Simondon well illustrates this slipping to technical connotation via the idea of automatism.3 From the strictly technological 1. See my account of the rhetoric of forms as 'atmospheric values', above, pp. 47 ff; for the sociological aspects, see 'Models and Series' below. 2. Thus, in the realm of forms, the tail fins of a car connote speed in the absolute, and this on the basis of formal criteria. 3. Du mode d'existence des objets techniques (Paris: Aubier, 1958), p. 26. 109 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S standpoint, the elimination of the starting-handle makes the mechanical operation of cars more complicated, because it subordinates it to the use of electrical power from a storage battery that is external to the system. This increased complication - and abstractness - is nevertheless presented as progress, as a sign of modernity. Thanks to the connotation of automatism, which in fact masks a structural weakness, cars with starting-handles now seem outdated, and those without, modern. Of course, one might argue that the lack of a starting-handle serves a func- tion every bit as real as the handle itself, namely the satisfaction of the desire for automatism. In the same way the chrome-plating and giant tail fins that weigh a car down could be said to serve the function of satisfying the demand for status. But the fulfilment of such secondary functions clearly militates against the material structure of the technical object. Even though so many unintegrated features remain both in the engine and in the external design of cars, the manu- facturers tout excessive automatism in accessories as the last word in mechanical achievement. The same goes for the systematic resort to servo-mechanisms, whose most immediate effect is to render an object more fragile, thus raising its cost, shortening its effective life, and hastening its replacement. 'Functional' Transcendence The degree to which a machine approaches perfection is thus everywhere presented as proportional to its degree of automatism. The fact is, however, that automating machines means sacrificing a very great deal of potential functionality. In order to automate a practical object, it is necessary to stereotype it in its function, thus making it more fragile. Far from having any intrinsic technical advantages, automatism always embodies the risk of arresting technical advance, for so long as an object has not been automated it remains susceptible of redesign, of self-transcendence through incorporation into a larger functional whole. When it becomes automatic, on the other hand, its function is fulfilled, certainly, but it is also hermetically sealed. Automatism amounts to a closing-off, to a sort of functional self-sufficiency which exiles man to the irresponsibility of a mere spectator. Contained within it is the dream of a dominated world, of a formally perfected technicity that serves an inert and dreamy humanity 110 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S Current technological thinking rejects this tendency in principle, and holds that true perfection in machines - one genuinely founded on an increasing level of technicity, and hence expressing true 'functionality' - depends not on more automatism but on a certain margin of indeterminacy which lets the machine respond to information from outside. The highly technical machine is thus an open structure, and a universe of such open-ended machines presupposes man as organizer and living interpreter. But even if the automatizing tendency is repulsed at the highest technological level, the fact remains that in practice it is continually pushing objects into a dangerous abstractness. Automatism is king, and its fascination is indeed so powerful precisely because it is not that of a technical rationality: rather, we come under its spell because we experience it as a basic desire, as the imaginary truth of the object, in comparison with which the object's structure and concrete function leave us cold. Consider merely our continual wishing for 'everything to work by itself, for every object to perform this miracle of minimum effort in the carrying out of its assigned function. For the user, automatism means a wondrous absence of activity, and the enjoyment this procures is comparable to that derived, on another plane, from seeing without being seen: an esoteric satisfaction experienced at the most everyday level. The fact that every automated object may lead us into often unchangeable stereotypical behaviour constitutes no real challenge to this immediate demand of ours: the desire for automatism is there first - it takes priority over objective practice. And if it is so firmly rooted that the myth of its formal realization presents an almost material obstacle to the open-ended structuring of techniques and needs, the reason is that it is rooted in objects as our own image.4 Because the automated object 'works by itself, its resemblance to the autonomous human being is unmistakable, and the fascination thus created carries the day. We are in the presence of a new anthropomorphism. Formerly the image of man was clearly imprinted in the morphology and the manner of use of tools, of furniture, or of the house itself.5 In the perfected technical object this compliance 4. Of course there is resistance here and there: a kind of 'heroic' personalization of driving, for instance, causes some people to disdain automatic gear-changing. But like it or not, such 'personal' heroism is destined to disappear. 5. Indeed, to some extent this still holds good for mechanical objects. The automobile, for example, has always continued to be shaped, even in its essential vehicular function, by the image of man. In its silhouette, its m T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S has been destroyed, but it has been replaced by a symbolism of superstructural rather than primary functions: it is no longer his gestures, his energy, his needs and the image of his body that man projects into automated objects, but instead the autonomy of his consciousness, his power of control, his own individual nature, his personhood. This supra-functionality of human consciousness is, in the end, what automa- tism strives to echo in the object. In a way that parallels the formal self-transcendence of the human individual, automatism aspires to be a sort of ne plus ultra of the object, enabling it to transcend its function. And automatism, too, uses a kind of formal abstraction to conceal structural defects, defence mechanisms and objective determinants. That perfect and perfectly autonomous monad which is the gov- erning dream of subjectivity is thus also very clearly the dream that haunts objects. Emancipated from its former naïve animism and too-human meanings, the object finds the elements of its modern mythology in its own technical existence (thanks to the projection into the technical domain of the absolute formal autonomy of individual consciousness). And automatism, as one of the paths that this object continues to follow, invariably leads to an over-signification of man in his formal essence and in his unconscious desires - thus setting up an obstinate barrier to the object's own concrete structural goal, which is 'to change life'. Man, for his part, by automating his objects and rendering them multi- functional instead of striving to structure his practices in a fluid and open-ended manner, reveals in a way what part he himself plays in a technical society: that of the most beautiful all-purpose object, that of an instrumental model. In this sense automatism and personalization do not contradict one another in the slightest. Automatism is simply personalization dreamt in terms of the object. It is the most finished, the most sublime form of the inessential - of that marginal differentiation which subtends man's personalized relationship to his objects.6 forms, its internal organization, its mode of propulsion and its fuel, its development has persistently passed up all sorts of structural possibilities out of respect for the demands of human morphology, behaviour and psychology. 6. On personalization, see 'Models and Series' below. Automatism is deeply implicated, moreover, in the motivations of fashion and the calculations of production: even the tiniest of increments in the degree of automatism is the surest way to decategorize entire classes of objects. 112 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S Functional Aberration: Gadgets Automatism per se is simply a technical deviation, but it opens the door to a whole world of functional delusion, to the entire range of manufactured objects in which a role is played by irrational complexity, obsessive detail, eccentric technicity or gratuitous formalism. In this poly-, para-, hyper- and meta-functional sphere, the object, at its farthest remove from objective determinants, is completely taken over by the imaginary We have seen that automatism always embodies an irrational projection of consciousness; in this 'schizofunctional' world, however, nothing leaves a trace except obsessions pure and simple. There is a complete pataphysics of the object awaiting description here, a science of imaginary technical solutions. If we ask, apropos of the objects that surround us, what is structural and what is astructural about them, or if we ask to what extent they are technical objects and to what extent accessories, gadgets or merely formal markers, we shall soon conclude - our highly neo-technical environment notwithstanding - that we live in a largely rhetorical and allegorical atmosphere. Indeed, it is the baroque, with its predilection for the allegorical, its new discursive individualism based on redundant forms and tricked-up materials, and its demiurgic formalism, that is the true inaugurating moment of the modern age. The baroque clearly foreshadows on the artistic plane all the themes and myths of our technological civilization, right down to its paroxysmic formalism of detail and movement. Once this point is reached, the technical balance of objects is upset. Too many accessory functions are introduced from the point of view of which the object answers no need other than the need to function-, it answers, in other words, to the functional superstition according to which for any operation there is - there must be - a corre- sponding object, and if none exists then one must be invented. As in the tinkering tradition of the Concours Lépine,7 no true innovation is to be seen, but by juggling stereotyped techniques objects are created that are at once incredibly specific in their function and absolutely useless. So precise is the function proposed, in fact, that it can only be a pretext: such objects are subjectively functional, that is to 7. [Translator's note: The annual exhibition of the Association of French Inventors and Manufacturers, founded in 1902 by Louis Lépine.] 113 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S say, obsessional. As for the opposite, 'aesthetic', approach, which omits function altogether and exalts the beauty of pure mechanism, this ultimately amounts to the same thing. For the inventor at the Concours Lépine, the creation of a solar-powered boiled-egg opener or some other equally dotty gadget is merely an excuse for obses- sive manipulation and contemplation. Like all obsessions, moreover, this particular variety has its poetic side, as manifested to a greater or lesser degree in Picabia's machines, in Tinguely's mechanical constructions, in the simple clockwork of a discarded watch, or in any object whose original use we simply cannot remember but whose mechanism still arouses a sort of delighted fascination in us. Something that serves no purpose whatsoever may in this sense still serve us. Pseudo-Functionality: Gizmos This empty functionalism is well summed up by the word 'gizmo'.8 A gizmo does have an operational value, but whereas the function of a machine is explicit in its name, a gizmo, in the context of the functional paradigm, is always an indeter- minate term with, in addition, the pejorative connotation of 'the thing without a name' or 'the thing I cannot name' (there is something immoral about an object whose exact purpose one does not know). The fact remains that it works. As a sort of dangling parenthesis, as an object detached from its function, what the 'gizmo' or the 'thingummyjig' suggests is a vague and limitless functionality - or perhaps better the mental picture of an imaginary functionality. It would be impossible to classify the whole range of obsessional polyfunc- tionality. From Marcel Aymé's 'vistemboif', whose nature is a mystery to everyone, though everyone is sure it does have a use, to that 'Something' which in the Radio Luxembourg guessing game is the subject of endless questions whereby thousands of listeners try to find the name of some minute item (e.g. the strip made of a special stainless alloy that is fitted in a slide trombone which ensures that . . . etc., etc.), and from Sunday-afternoon pottering to James Bond-style super-gadgetry, there 8. [Translator's note: I have used 'gizmo' for the French catch-all term 'machin', whose close kinship to the French 'machine' is thus not apparent in the English.] 114 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S extends a panoply of wondrous accessories culminating in the immense industrial output of everyday objects - gadgets or gizmos - whose obsessional degree of specialization easily matches the old-fashioned baroque imagination of the amateur inventor. What is one to say of the ultrasound washing-up machine which removes encrusted food from dishes without the intervention of the human hand, the toaster with a nine-level browning control, or the electric cocktail swizzle-stick? At the serial and industrial level, what was once merely charming eccentricity or indi- vidual neurosis becomes a daily and ceaseless assault on the mind, which is either overtaken by panic or over-excited by sheer detail. It is frightening to consider just how many things fall into the category of gizmos, just how many of our objects are covered by this empty concept. It is not difficult to see that the proliferation of technical detail here corresponds in each of us to an immense conceptual failure, and that our language is a very long way indeed behind the structures and functional articulation of the objects that we use, as it were, naturally. Our civilization has more and more objects and fewer and fewer names for them. The word 'machine', in becoming applicable to the realm of social labour, has acquired a precise enough generic sense; as recently as the late eighteenth century, however, it had much the same meaning as 'gizmo' today. Words like 'gizmo' now cover all those things which, on account of their specialization and because they answer to no true collective need, cannot be referred to as machines, and thus assume a mythological character. If 'machine' belongs to the sphere of functional 'language', 'gizmo' belongs to the subjective sphere of 'speech'. It goes without saying that in a civilization where such unname- able objects (or at any rate objects designated only in the loosest way, by means of neologism or paraphrase) are multiplying, resistance to mythology is perforce far weaker than in civilizations whose objects are clearly known and denominated down to their most detailed aspects. Today we live in a world of what Georges Friedmann calls Sunday drivers - people who have never opened the bonnets of their cars, people for whom functioning is not merely the function of things but also their mystery. If we grant that our environment, and by extension our everyday view of the world, is thus largely shaped by functional simulacra, we are bound to ask what 115 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S superstition serves to maintain and compensate for this conceptual inadequacy. What exactly is the key to this mysterious functioning of objects? The answer is a vague but tenacious obsession with a world-machine, with a universal mechanism. The machine and the gizmo are mutually exclusive. It is not that the machine is a perfected form, nor that the gizmo is a degraded one: rather, the two are different in kind, the first operating in the real, the second in the imaginary realm. 'Machine' signifies, and in so doing structures, a particular real practical whole; 'gizmo' signifies nothing more than a formal operation - though that operation is the total operation of the world. The virtue of a gizmo may be ridiculous in reality,9 but in the imagination it is universal. The electrical whatsit that extracts stones from fruit or some new vacuum-cleaner accessory for getting under sideboards are perhaps in the end not especially practical, but they do serve to reinforce the belief that for every need there is a possible mechanical answer, that every practical (and even psychological) problem may be foreseen, forestalled, resolved in advance by means of a technical object that is rational and adapted - perfectly adapted. As for what exactly it is adapted to, that is of no consequence. The important thing is that the world should present the appearance of having already been 'operated on'. The real referent of the gizmo is not a plum stone or the narrow space under the side- board, but nature in its entirety reinvented in accordance with the technical reality principle: a total simulacrum of an automated nature. This is its myth and its mystery. And like all mythologies, this one too has two sides to it: it mystifies man by submerging him in a functional dream, but it equally well mystifies the object by submerging it in the irrationality of human determinants. There is a close collusion between the human-all-too-human and the functional-all-too-functional: the impregnation of the human world by technical goals invariably implies tech- nology's impregnation by human ones - for better or for worse. We are, however, far more sensitive to human relationships being interfered with by the absurd and totalitarian concerns of technology than we are to technological development being interfered with by the absurd and totalitarian concerns of human beings. Yet 9. A minimal practical impingement on reality is nevertheless always required as a justification for the imaginary projection involved here. 116 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S it is unquestionably human irrationality and its figments which fuel the tendency for any machine to take on gizmo-like properties; it is they, in other words, which agitate functional phantasy behind any concrete functional praxis. The true functionality of the gizmo is unconscious in character - hence its fascination for us. That it should be absolutely functional, absolutely adapted (though to what?), shows that this functionality and this adaptation must needs refer to a demand of a non-practical kind. The myth of a wonder-working function- ality of the world is correlated with the phantasy of a wonder-working functionality of the body. There is a direct link between the paradigm of technical action executed by the world and the paradigm of sexual action executed by the subject; and in this perspective the gizmo, the ultimate tool, is basically a substitute for the phallus, the operative medium of function par excellence. Moreover, any object has something of the gizmo about it, for in proportion as its practical instrumentality fades it becomes susceptible of cathexis by a libidinal instrumentality. This is already true of the child's toy, or of any stone or piece of wood as perceived by 'primitives'; as we have seen, 'uncivilized' people can fetishize a simple pen, and 'civilized' ones can do the same with absolutely any abandoned mechanical object or ancient artefact. For any object whatsoever, in fact, the reality principle may be put in brackets. No sooner does an object lose its concrete practical aspect than it is transferred to the realm of mental practices. In short, behind every real object there is a dream object. We have already discussed the case of antiques in this context. In their case, however, the transcendence or mental abstraction concerned the material or the form, and was bound up with a regressive birth complex; pseudo-functional objects or 'gizmos', by contrast, are bound up with an abstract transcendence of the object's functioning, and hence with a projective, phallic power complex. Let me stress once more that this is an analytic distinction: whereas objects normally have but one real function, narrowly defined, their 'mental' functionality is unlimited, and any number of phantasies may have a place therein. A distinct evolution in their imaginary aspect is nevertheless signalled by the shift from an animistic to an energetic structure: traditional objects tended to bear witness to our presence, being static symbols of our bodily organs, but technical objects hold a different kind of fascination in that they evoke a virtual energy, and are thus less receptacles 117 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S of our presence than vehicles of our dynamic self-image. Here too, moreover, a reservation is called for, because the operation of energy itself tends to be down- played in the most modern devices, with their encapsulated and elliptical forms. In a world dominated by communications and information, the sight of energy at work has become a rarity. Miniaturization and gestural depletion erode symbolic expressiveness.10 But we may take comfort in the fact that even if objects sometimes escape practical human control, they never escape the imagination. Modes of the imaginary follow modes of technological evolution, and it is therefore to be expected that the next mode of technical efficiency will give rise to a new imaginary mode. At present its traits are difficult to discern, but perhaps, in the wake of the animistic and energetic modes, we shall need to turn our attention to the structures of a cybernetic imaginary mode whose central myth will no longer be that of an absolute organicism, nor that of an absolute functionalism, but instead that of an absolute interrelatedness of the world. For the time being our everyday environ- ment remains unevenly divided between the three. The old sideboard, the car and the tape recorder exist side by side in the one sphere, even though their imaginary modes of existence, just like their technical modes of existence, differ radically. At all events, whatever the functioning of the object may be like, we invariably experience it as OUR functioning: whatever the object's efficient mode - even should it be absurd, as in the case of the 'gizmo' - we project ourselves into that efficiency. In fact we do so especially when it is absurd, as witness the old phrase, at once magical and comical, according to which a thing 'might always come in useful': while it is true that objects do indeed serve specific purposes at times, they are much more commonly good for everything and nothing, and in that case their true utility lies in the very fact that they 'might always come in useful'. 10. In a world of miniaturized, mute, unmediated and impeccable appliances, the automobile, thanks to the dramatic visibility of engine and controls, remains the great exception - and the spectacular object par excellence. 118 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S Metafunctionality: Robots The ultimate expression of such imaginary projection is the object as dreamt up by science fiction - the pure realm of the gizmo. We should be greatly mistaken were we to view science fiction as an escape from everyday reality: on the contrary, it is an extrapolation from the irrational tendencies of that reality through the free exercise of narrative invention. Although it is an invaluable witness to the civilization of the object, precisely because it heightens certain aspects thereof, science fiction has absolutely no prophetic value. It has practically nothing to do with the real future of technological development, for which it accounts in the future perfect tense, so to speak, drawing for nourishment on sublime archaisms and on a repertory of acquired forms and functions. It contains little in the way of structural invention, but it is an inexhaustible mine of imaginary solutions to stereotyped needs and functional requirements of an often marginal or mind- boggling variety. In a way science fiction is the apotheosis of tinkering. But while its true exploratory value may be very feeble, it supplies us with a wealth of information on the unconscious. In particular, science fiction demonstrates what we have recognized as the most profound - albeit the most irrational - feature of the modern object, namely its automatism. When it comes down to it, the genre has only ever invented one super- object: the ROBOT. Soon man will no longer even have to steer his lawnmower on a Sunday afternoon, because it will start itself up, and stop once the job is done, of its own accord. Is this the only conceivable fate of objects? The itinerary laid down for them, leading inexorably to the complete automation of their existing functions,11 11. And perhaps - who knows? - to the total mimetism of 'spontaneous' self-generation, with coffee mills giving birth to baby coffee mills, just as children imagine. But things could surely then go no farther, because a machine capable of manufacturing an identical machine is, strictly speaking, inconceivable. Such a situa- tion would clearly represent the ultimate in autonomy (a logic which always ends in tautology), but it is a situation that the imaginary realm cannot embrace, because that would mean also embracing magical and infantile regression back to a stage where automatic duplication or scissiparity is possible. Such a machine would in any case be the height of absurdity: self-reproduction being its sole function, it could never pod peas at the same time. .. . Reproduction is never the sole function of man himself. The imaginary is not synonymous with madness, and it must always effectively preserve the distinction between man and his double. 119 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S has far less to do with humanity's future technology than with its present psycho- logical motivations. Consequently, the myth of the robot may be said to cover all paths taken by the unconscious in the realm of objects. The robot is a symbolic microcosm of both man and the world, which is to say that it simultaneously replaces both man and the world, synthesizing absolute functionality and absolute anthropomorphism. Its antecedents were electrical household appliances (cf. the 'automatic maid'). Fundamentally, therefore, the robot is simply the mythological end-product of a naïve phase of the imagination, a phase which implies the projec- tion of a continual and visible functionality. For the substitution in question has to be visible: if it is to exert its fascination without creating insecurity, the robot must unequivocally reveal its nature as a mechanical prosthesis (its body is metallic, its gestures are discrete, jerky and unhuman). A robot that mimicked man to the point where its gestures had a truly human fluidity would create anxiety. What the robot must be is the symbol of a world at once entirely functionalized and entirely personalized, and hence reassuring at all levels; a world which can reincarnate the abstracted power of man just as far as is conceivable short of its being utterly engulfed by identification.12 If, for the unconscious, the robot is the perfect object that sums up all the others, this is not simply because it is a simulacrum of man as a functionally efficient being; rather, it is because, though the robot is indeed such a simulacrum, it is not so perfect in this regard as to be man's double, and because, for all its humanness, it always remains quite visibly an object, and hence a slave. In the last analysis, robots are always slaves. They may be endowed with any of the qualities that define human sovereignty except one, and that is sex. Their fascination and their symbolic value must operate under this one constraint. By virtue of their multifunctionalism 12. Let me return here for a moment to the fable of the eighteenth-century automaton that I recounted above (see p. 56). When the illusionist, at the pinnacle of his artistry, renders his own gestures mechanical and subtly changes his own appearance, his intention is to bring out his performance's true raison d'être, which is the pleasure to be derived from the difference between the automaton and the man. His audience would be far too alarmed if they were really unable to tell which figure was 'real', and he knows full well that creating a perfect automaton, and hence a perfect identity, is far less important than giving play to difference - and, indeed, that the very best outcome is that the spectators should take the machine for the man and the man for the machine. 120 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S they attest to man's phallic reign over the world, but at the same time, inasmuch as they are controlled, dominated, directed and rendered asexual, they also attest to a phallus that is enslaved, to a sexuality that is domesticated and unaccompanied by anxiety: all that remains is an obedient functionality embodied (so to speak) in an object which resembles me, an object to which the world is subject yet which is simultaneously subject to my will In this way a threatening part of myself has been exorcized and turned into a sort of all-powerful slave, cast in my image, which I can use for purposes of self-aggrandizement. It is thus not hard to understand the urge that exists to have all objects accede to the status of robots. This is the logical end of the object's unconscious psycholog- ical function. Its actual end, too - for the robot can evolve no farther: it is frozen in its resemblance to man and in functional abstraction at all costs. Active genital sexuality expires here also, because, as projected into the robot, it is neutralized, deactivated, conjured away - itself immobilized within the object whose development it has terminated. The process of abstraction here is narcissistic; the universe of science fiction is asexual. The robot is interesting on a number of other counts also. As the mythological end of the object, it gathers unto itself all the phantasies attendant upon our deepest relationships with our environment. The robot is a slave, then, but let us not forget that the theme of slavery is always bound up - even in the legend of the sorcerer's apprentice - with the theme of revolt. In one form or another, robots in revolt are by no means rare in science fiction. And that revolt is implicit even when it is not manifest. The robot, like the slave, is both good and perfidious: good as a captive force; perfidious as a force that may break its chains. Like the sorcerer's apprentice, man has every reason to fear the resurrection of this force which he has exorcized and bound to his own image. It is in fact his own sexuality, liable now to turn against him, that he is afraid of. Once liberated, unchained and in revolt, sexuality becomes man's mortal enemy. This is the lesson of the frequent and unpredictable revolts of robots, of the maleficent mutations that affect them, and even merely of the disquieting, ever-present threat of such brutal conversions occurring. Man is thus prey to the deepest forces within him: he finds himself confronted by a double who has enlisted his energies and 121 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S whose appearance, according to legend, spells death. What the mechanical perfidy of the science-fiction robot means (beyond the implication of a functional break- down of the environment) is that subjugated phallic energies are rising in revolt. These narratives propose two solutions in this situation. Sometimes man tames the 'evil' forces that have been unleashed, and 'moral' order is restored. Alternatively, the forces embodied in the robot self-destruct: automatism is itself driven to suicide. The theme of the robot that goes off the rails and destroys itself is a common one - indeed, it is closely akin to the theme of the robot in revolt. There is a secret apocalypse of objects - or of the Object - which fuels the passionate interest of the reader. It is tempting to connect this development to a moral denunciation of the diabolical nature of science, the point being that if technology is on its own road to damnation, man will be restored to an untrammelled nature. This moral theme unquestionably plays a part in fictional narratives, but it is at once too naïve and too rational. Morality -per se fascinates no one, yet the anticipated disintegration of the robot produces a strange satisfaction. The recurrent phantasy of ritualistic fragmen- tation which is the culminating point of the object's functional triumphalism is determined less by a moral constraint than by a profound wish. The spectacle of death is relished, and if we accept the idea that the robot symbolizes a subjugated sexuality, then by extension the robot's disintegration must constitute for man the symbolic spectacle of the atomization of his own sexuality - which he himself destroys, having pressed it into the service of his image. If we carry the Freudian view to its logical conclusion, we cannot but wonder whether this is not man's way of using technology in its most demented incarnations to celebrate the future occurrence of his own death, his way of renouncing his sexuality in order to be quit of all anxiety. The current fashion for 'happenings' has brought the great science-fiction event of the 'suicide' or murder of the object a little closer to home. The happening involves an orgiastic destruction and debasement of objects, a veritable hecatomb whereby our whole satiated culture revels in its own degradation and death. A recent fad in the United States amounts to a mass-marketing of the happening in the shape of novel contraptions, composed of gears, rods, shafts and what-have-you - true jewels of useless functionality whose merit lies in the fact that they fall apart 122 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S of their own accord, suddenly and irreparably, after a few hours of operation. These objects are exchanged as gifts, and the period during which they duly malfunction, disintegrate and die is the occasion for a social get-together. A similar, though less extreme, phenomenon is the embodiment in certain present-day objects of a kind of fatum. Here the car once again has pride of place. The individual commits himself to a car for better or for worse. Certainly the car serves him, but he would seem to accept and expect something more from it: the sort of destiny which in the cinema, for example, is ritually represented by death in a road accident. The Transformations of Technology We may thus trace functional mythologies, born of technics itself, all the way to a sort of fatality in which the world-mastering technology seems to crystallize in the form of an inverse and threatening purpose. At this point it behoves us to do two things. In the first place, we must reframe the problem of the fragility of objects, and of their defection; for although in the first instance objects present themselves to us as reassuring, as factors of equilibrium, albeit of a neurotic kind, they are also in the end a factor of continual disillusionment. Secondly, we must challenge our society's implicit assumption that a rationality of ends and means governs the sphere of production and the technological project itself. The object's dysfunctionality, its counter-purpose, is governed by two parallel sets of determinants: a socio-economic system of production and a psychological system of projection. It is the reciprocal involvement of these two systems, their collusion, that we need to define. Technological society thrives on a tenacious myth, the myth of uninterrupted technical progress accompanied by a continuing moral 'backwardness' of man relative thereto. These two claims are mutually supportive: moral 'stagnation' transfigures technical progress and turns it into the only certain value, and hence the ultimate authority of our society; by the same token, the system of production is absolved of all responsibility. A supposed moral contradiction serves to conceal the true contradiction, which is the fact, precisely, that the present production 123 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S system, while working for real technological progress, at the same time opposes it (along with any restructuring of social relationships to which it might lead). The myth of a happy convergence of technology, production and consumption masks all political and economic counter-purposes. How indeed could a system of techniques and objects conceivably progress harmoniously while the system of relations between the people who produced it continued to stagnate or regress? The fact is that humans and their techniques, needs and objects are structurally interlocked come what may. The indivisibility, within any single cultural sphere, of individual and social structures and of technical and functional modalities must surely be deemed axiomatic. Our technological civilization is no exception to the rule: techniques and objects therein suffer the same servitudes as human beings - and the process of material organization, hence of objective technical progress, is subject to exactly the same blocks, deviations and regressions as the concrete process of the socialization of human relationships, hence of objective social progress. There is a cancer of the object: the proliferation of astructural elements that underpins the object's triumphalism is a kind of cancer. It is upon such astructural elements (automatism, accessory features, inessential differences) that the entire social network of fashion and controlled consumption is founded.13 They are the bulwark which tends to halt genuine technical development. On their account, while appearing to manifest all the metamorphic powers of a prodigious health, objects that are already saturated wear themselves out completely through convulsive formal variation and changes whose impact is strictly visual. 'Technically speaking/ writes Lewis Mumford, 'changes in form and style are signs of immaturity; they mark a period of transition. The error of capitalism as a creed lies in the attempt to make this period of transition a permanent one/14 And Mumford notes that in the United States, for example, after the grand wave of inventions which between 1910 and 1940 brought in the automobile, the aeroplane, 13. See 'Models and Series' below. 14. Technics and Civilization (see above, p. 57, note 37), p. 396. The decisiveness of capitalism in this regard is manifest for an entire period, certainly, but once a certain threshold in technological development and in the distribution of goods and products has been passed, things are far less cut and dried. 124 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S the refrigerator, the television, and so on, significant invention practically petered out. Improvement, refinement, packaging - anything to enhance the prestige of the object, but nothing by way of structural innovation. 'The chief obstacle to the fuller development of the machine lies in the association of taste and fashion with waste and commercial profiteering/15 On the one hand, indeed, minor improvements, added complexity and ancillary systems sustain a false consciousness of 'progress' and conceal the urgent necessity for fundamental changes (a 'reformism' of the object, one might say). On the other hand, fashion - which, with its inchoate proliferation of secondary systems, is ruled by chance - is also the realm of an infinite recurrence of forms, and hence of maximum commercial prospects. There is in fact a fundamental antagonism between the verticality of technology and the horizontality of profit - between the continual self-transcendence of technical invention and the closedness of a system of recurrent objects and forms beholden to the goals of production. This is where we encounter the ambition of objects to act as replacements for human relationships. In its concrete function the object solves a practical problem, but in its inessential aspects it resolves a social or psychological conflict. Such, at any rate, is the modern 'philosophy' of the object as understood by Ernest Dichter, prophet of motivation research, whose thesis boils down to the claim that for any source of tension whatsoever, for any individual or collective conflict, there must be an object capable of resolving it.16 Just as there is a saint for every day of the year, so there is an object for every problem: the important thing is to manufacture and launch that object at the right moment. What Dichter deems an ideal solution, however, Mumford more accurately sees as a solution by default, but Mumford's conception of the object and of technics as substitute answers to human conflicts - a conception which he extends within a critical perspective to our whole civilization - is essentially the same as Dichter's. 'The fact is', he writes, 15. Ibid., p. 353. 16. See The Strategy of Desire (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1960), p. 84. 125 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S that an elaborate mechanical organization is often a temporary and expensive substitute for an effective social organization or for a sound biological adaptation. Power machines have given a sort of licence to social inefficiency. The machine, so far from being a sign in our present civilization of human power and order, is often an indication of ineptitude and social paralysis.17 It is difficult to assess the total cost to society as a whole of thus referring real conflicts and needs to the technical sphere, itself in thrall to fashion and forced consumption. But that cost is certainly colossal. If one considers the automobile, for instance, it is very hard now even to imagine what an extraordinary tool for the reorganization of human relations it might have been, thanks to its victory over space and the structural convergence of several techniques that it represented, so quickly did it become encrusted with parasitic functions defined by the require- ments of prestige, comfort, unconscious projection, and so forth - functions which first impeded and then blocked the automobile's essential function, which was human integration. Today the car is a completely inert object. Ever more thoroughly abstracted from its social function of transportation, while at the same time serving to trap that function within archaic modalities, it continues to undergo frantic transformations, revisions and metamorphoses within the limits of possibility of a structure that cannot be changed. And a whole civilization can come to a halt in the same way as the automobile. Three collateral lines of development may be distinguished here. The first concerns the technical structuring of the object, implying the convergence of functions, integration, material form and economy. The second concerns a parallel structuring of the world and of nature: space is mastered, energy is controlled, materials are mobilized - and a more meaningful and interrelated world emerges. Thirdly, human praxis, both individual and collective, is so structured as to foster an ever greater 'relativity' and mobility, along with an open-ended integration and an 17. Mumford, Technics, pp. 275, 276 and 426 respectively. 126 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S 'economy' of society analogous to that of the most highly evolved technical objects. Despite the discrepancies arising from the distinct dynamics of each of these levels, it may be observed that, broadly speaking, whenever development slows or stops, it does so on all three at once. Once a technical object's development is arrested at a given outcome (which at the second level, in the case of the car, means a partial victory over space), it will henceforward do no more than continue to connote that frozen structure, to which all manner of subjective motivations will now return cathectically (regression at the third level). It is at this point that the technical object, having lost all dynamism, may enter into a relationship of fixed complementarity: car and house, for example, will come to constitute a closed system invested with conventional values, and the car, ceasing to serve relationship or exchange, will truly be nothing but an object of consumption: 'Not alone have the older forms of technics served to constrain the development of the neotechnic economy: but the new inventions and devices have been frequently used to maintain, renew, and stabilize the structure of the old order/18 The automobile no longer removes obstacles between men; on the contrary, men now invest the automobile with that which separates them. Space mastered becomes an even greater obstacle than the space over which mastery was sought in the first place.19 Technics and the Unconscious System All the same, we have eventually to ask ourselves whether there is not something more at the root of this relative stagnation of forms and techniques, this systematic 18. Ibid., p. 266. 19. In a comparable way we may suppose that cinema and television have passed up, or are in the midst of passing up, vast concrete opportunities for 'changing life'. As Edgar Morin has written: Nobody is surprised by the fact that from the instant of its birth the cinematograph was drastically diverted from its apparent technical and scientific goals, that it was snapped up by show business and turned into the 'cinema', with the result that developments that might have seemed natural were atrophied from the outset. (Le cinéma ou l'homme imaginaire [Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1956], p. 15) Morin goes on to show how the sluggishness of innovation (sound, colour, depth) was bound up with the consumption-driven exploitation of the cinema. 127 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S deficit (whose remarkable efficiency in terms of social integration will nevertheless be confirmed below when we discuss 'Models and Series'), than the self-interested dictatorship of a system of production, than an absolutely - and absolutely alienating - social agency. Whether, as Lewis Mumford puts it, it is simply a 'social accident' that objects remain in a state of underdevelopment. If humanity were 'innocent' in this respect, if the production system alone were responsible for technology's immaturity, there would indeed be an accident here - a contradiction just as inexplicable as its diametrical opposite, the bourgeois fiction of 'advanced' technology held back by moral 'retardation'. The truth is that there is no accident, and even if we must assign the lion's share of responsibility to a production system, structurally linked to the social order, which exploits the entire society by means of a system of objects, we still cannot help concluding, in view of the system's permanence and solidity, that a collusion exists somewhere between the collective order of production and an individual order of needs, albeit an unconscious one. What I mean by 'collusion' is a close relationship of negative complicity, or a set of reciprocal determinations, between the dysfunctionality of the socio-economic system and the far-reaching effects of the unconscious; the question was touched on above in connection with robots. If connotation and personalization, fashion and automatism, all tend to focus upon those astructural features whose irrational motivations the logic of production seeks to control and systematize, this is perhaps also because man has neither a clear will to transcend nor any great prospect of transcending the aforementioned archaic structures of projection; or at least that he has a deep-seated resistance to sacrificing subjective, projective virtualities and their eternal recurrence on the altar of concrete structural development (both technical and social); or again, to put it in the simplest terms, that man has a profound resistance to imposing rationality upon the purely arbitrary goals of his needs. This may well constitute a fatal turn for the modus existendi of the object, as indeed of society as a whole. Once a certain point in technical development has been reached, and once primary needs have been satisfied, we may well demand a phantasied, allegorical and subconscious edibility of the object as much as, or even more than, an actual functionality. Why is it, after all, that the design of the automobile is not different: why is the driver's seat not 128 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S positioned forward and the vehicle streamlined in such a way as to let the operator efficiently occupy the space he has to travel through, instead of placing him in a substitute house - even, as it were, within a substitute subject endowed with projectile force? Surely the answer must be that the current form (even more exag- gerated in racing cars, whose excessively long bonnet has every appearance of providing an absolute model here) facilitates an essential projection which is ultimately far more important than any progress in the art and science of travel. Apparently man needs to overburden the world with this 'unconscious' discourse of his, even at the cost of halting that world's development. The implica- tions of this are very far-reaching. If indeed the astructural elements around which our most tenacious desires seem to crystallize are not just parallel functions, complications or overloads, but properly speaking dysfunctions, failures or aberra- tions relative to an objective structural order, if indeed a whole civilization appears ready to turn away on their account from a genuine revolution in its structures, and if indeed all this is not accidental, then we are justified in asking whether man, under cover of the myth of functional extravagance (or 'personalized affluence'), which in fact conceals an obsession with his own image, does not after all incline much more towards an increasingly dysfunctional world than towards an increas- ingly functional one. He does appear, at any rate, to go along with the play of dysfunctions which is progressively turning our environment into a world of objects arrested in their growth by their own outgrowths, as it were, objects disappointed and disappointing to the very extent that they become personalized. The substitutional aspect of the object, which a moment ago we noted was a decisive one, is even more in evidence here: it is even truer on the plane of un- conscious conflicts than on that of social or conscious psychological ones, as evoked by Ernest Dichter and Lewis Mumford, that the use of technics - and, more simply, the consumption of objects - has secondary roles to play, imaginary solutions to offer. Technics as an effective mediation between man and the world is indeed the harder path. The easier path is the interpolation of a system of objects as an imaginary resolution of contradictions of every kind. This amounts to a short circuit between the technical order and the order of individual needs, a short circuit which exhausts the energies of both systems. Small wonder that the resulting system 129 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S of objects should bear the stigma of defection: its structural deficiency reflects the contradiction to which the system offers a merely formal solution. As the individual or collective cover for one conflict or another, the system of objects is inevitably marked by its denial of those conflicts. But what are the conflicts that objects are called upon to cover up? Humanity has its whole future wagered on the simultaneous harnessing of natural external forces and of the internal pressure of the libido, both of which it experiences as threatening and fateful. The unconscious economy of the system of objects is a mechanism of projection and domestication (or control) of the libido which brings an efficient principle to bear. The domination of nature and the production of goods are in effect a parallel benefit thereof. Unfortunately, however, this admirable economy carries a dual risk for the human order: first there is the danger that sexuality might be in some sense conjured away and foreclosed in the technical realm, secondly the danger that this technical realm might in turn be disturbed in its development by the conflicted energy by which it has been invested. All the preconditions are thus assembled for the emergence of an insoluble contradiction, a permanent defection: the fact is that the system of objects as it operates today embodies an ever-present potential for consent to this sort of regression - the lure of an end to sexuality, its definitive absorption in the recurrence and continual forward flight of the technical order. In practice the technical order always retains a certain dynamism of its own that blocks the sort of infinite recurrence characteristic of a perfect regressive system of this kind (which is equivalent, strictly speaking, to death). The necessary conditions for such an eventuality are nevertheless present in our system of objects, and the system is haunted by the temptation of a reverse evolution which coexists in it with the potential for progress. This temptation to regress towards what can only be called death as a way of escaping from sexual anxiety sometimes assumes forms - still within the context of the technical order - that are ever more spectacular and brutal. It may then be transformed into the temptation, truly tragic in its implications, to see this order itself turned against its instigator - that is, against humanity; to see an ineluctable fate re-emerge from within the very technical order that had been designed to 130 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S exorcize it - a process akin to the one described by Freud, whereby repressed energy returns via the repressing agency itself and derails all mechanisms of defence. In contrast to the reassurance vouchsafed by a gradual regression, the tragic variety precipitates the dizzying sensations associated with such a brusque resolution of the conflict between the sexual drives and the ego. These sensations are a response to the eruption of hitherto contained energies within technical objects themselves - that is to say, within the very symbols of mastery over the world. Two contradictory goals are pursued simultaneously: the inevitability of fate is challenged, yet at the same time sought. This contradiction is reflected in the economic order of production, which, though it produces ceaselessly, can produce only fragile objects - objects that are partly dysfunctional and destined for an early death; the system thus works to destroy such objects as well as to produce them. Let me stress once again that it is not the fragility of objects that is tragic, nor their death. Rather, it is the temptation represented by that fragility and that death. This temptation is satisfied in a way when an object fails us, even though this failing may at the same time inconvenience us or throw us into despair. This is the same kind of malign and vertiginous satisfaction that we encountered earlier, as projected into phantasies of revolt and destruction on the part of robots. The object takes its revenge. It becomes 'personalized' - in this case for the worse - because it revolts. This hostile volte-face may shock us and take us by surprise, but there is no deny- ing that a submissive attitude soon develops towards this revolt, which we treat as inevitable, and as evidence of a fragility that distinctly appeals to us. A technical hitch infuriates us, but an avalanche of technical hitches can fill us with glee; if a jug develops a crack we are pained, but if it smashes to smithereens there is satisfaction in it. Our reaction to an object's failure is in fact always ambiguous. This failure threatens our well-being, yet it gives material expression to the objection that we continually raise with respect to ourselves - an objection which also demands satisfaction. As Ernest Dichter points out, you expect a cigarette lighter to work, but 'you do not assume, or even desire, that your lighter would admirably perform under all conditions'.20 One has merely to imagine an infallible object, and the disillusion it would 20. Dichter, The Strategy of Desire, p. 94. 131 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S inevitably entail in connection - precisely - with the aforementioned objection one has to oneself, in order to realize that infallibility invariably generates anxiety. The fact is that a world without fallibility would imply the definitive resorption of an inevitable fate - and hence of sexuality. This is why we greet the slightest hint of a resurgence of fatefulness with deep satisfaction: the slightest breach allows sexuality to revive, even if for only a moment, even if it takes the form of a hostile force (as it always does in this context), and even if its emergence in such circum- stances means failure, death and destruction. The underlying contradiction is thus resolved in contradictory fashion, but could things really go otherwise?21 Our 'technological' civilization, as foreshadowed by the American model, is a world at once systematized and fragile. The system of objects is the embodiment of this systematization of fragility, of ephemerality, of the ever more rapid recurrence of the repetition compulsion; the embodiment of satisfaction and disillusion; the embodiment of the problematical exorcism of the real conflicts that threaten individual and social relationships. With the advent of our consumer society, we are seemingly faced for the first time in history by an irreversible organized attempt to swamp society with objects and integrate it into an indispensable system designed to replace all open interaction between natural forces, needs and techniques. The principal basis of this system would appear to be the official, obligatory and super- vised demise of the objects that it comprises: a gigantic collective 'happening' whereby the death of the group itself is celebrated through the euphoric destruction or ritualistic devouring of objects and gestures.22 Here again one could argue that nothing more is involved than an infantile disorder of the technological society, and attribute such growing pains entirely to the dysfunctionality of our present social structures - i.e. to the capitalist order of production. The long-term prospect 21. A good illustration of this is the legend of the Student of Prague, according to which the protagonist's image steps out of the mirror and assumes the form of a double which haunts him (following the conclusion of a pact with the devil). Henceforward he has no reflection in the mirror, though his image continues to haunt him. One day, when the double happens (as in the primal scene) to be standing between him and the mirror, the student shoots and kills it - which is to say, of course, that he kills himself, for the double has stripped him of his reality. Just before he dies, however, he rediscovers his true image in the shards of the broken mirror. 22. This is what Edgar Morin has called the nihilism of consumption. 132 G A D G E T S A N D R O B O T S of a transcendence of the whole system would thus remain open. On the other hand, if something more is involved than the anarchic ends of a production system determined by social exploitation, if deeper conflicts in fact play a part - highly individual conflicts, but extended onto the collective plane - then any prospect of ultimate transcendence must be abandoned for ever. Are we contemplating the developmental problems of a society ultimately destined to become the best of all possible worlds, or, alternatively, an organized regression in the face of insoluble problems? Is all this the work of anarchic production relations or of the death instinct? What, in short, has made a civilization go wrong in this way? The question is still open. 133 D . T H E S O C I O - I D E O L O G I C A L S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S A N D T H E I R C O N S U M P T I O N I Models and Series The Pre-Industrial Object and the Industrial Model The status of the modern object is dominated by the MODEL /SERIES distinction. To some extent, things were ever thus. A privileged minority in society has always served as a testing-ground for successive styles whose solutions, methods and artifices were then disseminated by local craftsmen. All the same, one cannot exactly speak of 'models' or 'series' in connection with any time before the industrial era. For one thing, there was a far greater homogeneity among all objects in pre-industrial society, because the mode of their production was still everywhere handcraft, because they were far less specialized in function, and because the cultural range of forms was more restricted (there being little reference to earlier or to extraneous traditions); furthermore, there was a much tighter segregation between the class of objects that could lay claim to 'style' and the class of locally produced objects that had use value only. Today a farmhouse table has cultural value, but just thirty years ago its sole value arose from the purpose it served. In the eighteenth century there was simply no relationship between a 'Louis XV table and a peasant's table: there was an unbridgeable gulf between the two types of object, just as there was between the two corresponding social classes. No single cultural 137 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S system embraced them both.1 Nor can it be said that a Louis XIII table is the model of which the countless tables and chairs that later imitated it are the serial form.2 A limited dissemination of craft techniques did occur here, but there was no dissemination of values: the 'model' remained absolute, for it was bound to a transcendent reality. No serial production in the modern sense could be based on it. The social order was what gave objects their standing. A person was noble or not: nobility was not the ultimate - privileged - term in a series but, rather, a grace that bestowed absolute distinction. In the realm of objects the equivalent of this transcendent idea of nobility is what we call the 'style' of a period. This distinction between pre-industrial 'period' objects and the 'models' of today is a very important one, because it allows us to get beyond the purely formal opposition and clarify the concrete relationship between model and series in our modern system. Considering that broad strata of our society do in fact live among serially produced objects that refer formally and psychologically to models which only a small minority can enjoy, there is a strong temptation to simplify the problem by positing a polarity between the former and the latter, and then assigning the value of reality to just one of the poles: to separate series and model completely so as neatly to assign one to the real and the other to the imaginary realm. Unfortunately, the everydayness of serial objects is not unreal as compared with a putative world of models as true values, nor is the sphere of models imaginary just because it affects but a tiny minority, and thus might seem to fall outside social reality. Thanks to mass information and communications systems which promote models, there is now not only a well-established circulation of objects as such but also a 'psycholog- ical' circulation which constitutes a radical watershed between our industrial age and the pre-industrial age of the transcendent distinctiveness of period 'style'. Anyone who has bought a walnut bedroom set at Dubonbois Home Furnishings 1. Differences between classes of objects are doubtless never quite so sharp as those between social classes, however. The absolute hierarchical distinction between orders of society is mitigated at the level of objects by use: a table, after all, serves the same basic function at every rung of the social ladder. 2. It is true that much more recently the Henri II sideboard has become a true serial object, but this was achieved via the very different route of the industrial production of cultural objects. 138 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S or a few mass-produced electrical household appliances, and may indeed have done so as a way of realizing a personal dream and as a mark of upward social mobility, knows full well at the same time, through the press, the cinema or the television, that completely 'harmonized' and 'fully functional' living spaces are on the market. Naturally he perceives such things as part of a world of luxury and status from which he is almost inevitably excluded by money; yet he also feels that today this exclusion is no longer underwritten by any class-based legal statute, by any transcending social rationale buttressed by laws. This conviction is of para- mount psychological significance, because it means that despite the frustration, despite the material impossibility of acceding to the model object, the use of serial objects invariably embodies an implicit or explicit reference to models. Reciprocally, models themselves have quit their former isolated, caste-like existence;3 having become part of industrial production, they are themselves now open to serial distribution. They, too, are now said to be 'functional7 (an unthinkable claim for 'period' furniture) and in principle accessible to all. Likewise anyone, in principle, via the very humblest of objects, may partake of the model. Indeed, both model and serial objects in the pure form are increasingly difficult to find. The transition from the one to the other is subject to an infinite differentiation. Just like the production process, the object traverses every shade in the social spectrum. Such transitions are experienced in everyday life in terms of possibility and in terms of frustration: the model is internalized by those who are involved with serial objects, while the series is intimated, negated, transcended and lived in a contradictory manner by those who have to do with models. The socially immanent tendency whereby the series hews ever more narrowly to the model, while the model is continually being diffused into the series, has set up a perpetual dynamic which is in fact the very ideology of our society. The 'Personalized' Object It should be noted that the model/series scheme regarding the distribution of objects does not apply evenly to all categories. It works fine in the realm of clothing 3. This is not to say that they have lost their class-specific character (see below). 139 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S (for example, a dress from Fath versus a ready-to-wear dress) or in that of cars (for example, a Facel-Vega versus a Citroën 2CV). The more specific an object's function, however, the more ambiguous things become; thus the difference between a 'Frigidaire' from General Motors and a 'Frigeco' refrigerator, or between one television set and another, is not so easy to classify. In the case of small utensils such as coffee mills, the notion of 'model' tends to become indistinguishable from that of 'type', because the object's function tends very largely to absorb differences of status, which may eventually amount to no more than the contrast between luxury models and serial models. (This distinction marks the weakest expression of the notion of model.) At the opposite extreme, when we turn our attention to machines - collective objects par excellence - we find that there is no such thing, either, as a luxury version of a pure machine: a rolling-mill, even if it is the only example of its type in the world, is still, from the moment it appears, a serial object. One machine may be more 'modern' than another, but this does not make it the 'model' for which other, less advanced machines constitute the corresponding series. In order to ensure comparable performance, it will be necessary to build other machines of the same type - that is, to construct a pure series on the basis of this first member. There is no place here for a range of calibrated differences that might serve as the basis of a psychological dynamic. At the level of pure function, since there are no combinative variants, there cannot be any models either.4 The psycho-sociological dynamic of model and series does nol, therefore, operate at the level of the object's primary function, but merely at the level of a secondary function, at the level of the 'personalized' object. That is to say: at the level of an object grounded simultaneously in individual requirements and in that system of differences which is, properly speaking, the cultural system itself. 4. The work of art does not answer to the model/series scheme either. The same categorical alternative is posed here as for the machine: the machine fulfils or does not fulfil a function, the work of art is genuine or fake. There are no marginal differences. Only at the level of the private and personalized object (not at the level of the work itself) does the model/series dynamic come into play. 140 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S Choice No object is proposed to the consumer as a single variety. We may not be granted the material means to buy it, but what our industrial society always offers us 'a priori', as a kind of collective grace and as the mark of a formal freedom, is choice. This availability of the object is the foundation of 'personalization':5 only if the buyer is offered a whole range of choices can he transcend the strict necessity of his purchase and commit himself personally to something beyond it. Indeed, we no longer even have the option of not choosing, of buying an object on the sole grounds of its utility, for no object these days is offered for sale on such a 'zero- level' basis. Our freedom to choose causes us to participate in a cultural system willy-nilly. It follows that the choice in question is a specious one: to experience it as freedom is simply to be less sensible of the fact that it is imposed upon us as such, and that through it society as a whole is likewise imposed upon us. Choosing one car over another may perhaps personalize your choice, but the most important thing about the fact of choosing is that it assigns you a place in the overall economic order. According to John Stuart Mill, choosing such and such an object in order to distinguish oneself from other people is in itself of service to society. Increasing the number of objects makes it easier for society to divert the faculty of choice onto them, so neutralizing the threat that the personal demand for choice always represents for it. Clearly 'personalization', far from being a mere advertis- ing ploy, is actually a basic ideological concept of a society which 'personalizes' objects and beliefs solely in order to integrate persons more effectively.6 Marginal Difference The corollary of the fact that every object reaches us by way of a choice is the fact that fundamentally no object is offered as a serial object, that every single object claims model status. The most insignificant object must be marked off by some 5. Where an object does exist in one version only (as in the case of cars in East Germany), this is an indication of penury which strictly speaking antedates the consumer society. No society can afford to consider such a stage anything but provisional. 6. I shall come back to this system later. 141 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S distinguishing feature - a colour, an accessory, a detail of one sort or another. Such a detail is always presented as specific: 'This dustbin is absolutely original - Gilac Décor has decked it with flowers for you!' 'A revolution in refrigeration - complete with brand-new freezer compartment and butter softener!' 'An electric razor on the cutting edge of progress - hexagonal, antimagnetic!' These are what David Riesman calls marginal differences; perhaps it would be more exact to call them inessential differences. The fact is that at the level of the industrial object and its technological coherence the demand for personalization can be met only in inessentials. The sole way to personalize cars is for the manu- facturer to take a serially produced chassis, a serially produced engine, then change a few external characteristics or add a couple of accessory features. A car cannot be personalized in its essence as a technical object, but only in its inessential aspects. Of course, the more the object must respond to the demands of personaliza- tion, the more its essential characteristics are burdened by extrinsic requirements. Coachwork is weighed down by accessories, for example, even to the point where technical norms for a vehicle such as fluidity of line and mobility are contravened. 'Marginal' difference is thus not solely marginal, for it can run counter to an object's technical essence. The personalization function is not just an added value - it is also a parasitic value. Indeed, from the technological standpoint it is impossible to conceive of an object in an industrial system being personalized without thereby losing some measure of its optimal technical quality. The dictates of production bear the most responsibility here, for they play unrestrainedly on inessentials in order to promote consumption. So, when you choose YOUR Ariane, you have forty-two colour combinations to select from (including solid colours and two-colour versions). De luxe hub-caps are available from your dealer when you buy your car. The point is, of course, that all these 'specific' differences are themselves picked up and mass-produced in serial form. And this secondary seriality is what constitutes fashion. Ultimately, there- fore, every object is a model, yet at the same time there are no more models. What we are left with in the end are successive limited series, a disjointed transition to ever more restricted series based on ever more minute and ever more specific 142 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S differences. There are simply no more absolute models - and no more serial objects devoid of value categorically opposed to them. If it were otherwise, there would be no psychological basis for choice - and hence no cultural system. Or at least, no cultural system capable of embracing modern industrial society in its entirety. The Ideal Nature of Models How does this system of personalization and integration work? Its operation depends in the first place on the fact that each 'specific' difference continually negates and disavows the object's serial reality to the benefit of the model. Objectively, as we have seen, such differences are inessential. Furthermore, they often mask technical shortcomings.7 They are in fact differences by default. They are always experienced, however, as features conferring distinction, indicative of value - as differences of overmeasure. It is thus not necessary for a concrete model to exist for every category of objects, and in many cases none does: minuscule differences, invariably apprehended as positive, quite suffice to extend the series, to create the aspiration towards a model that may be merely virtual. Such marginal differences are the motor of the series, and fuel the mechanism of integration. Series and model should not be conceived of as two poles of a formal opposition, with the model being viewed as a sort of essence which - once divided and multiplied, so to speak, by virtue of the concept of 'mass' - gives birth to the series. From this standpoint, the model appears as a more concrete or denser state of the object which enables it to be retailed or disseminated as a series formed in its own image. The model /series distinction is often used in this way to evoke a kind of entropy homologous to the degeneration of higher forms of energy into heat. This conception, which deduces the series from the model, is completely at loggerheads with lived experience, which implies a continual inductive movement from the series into the model - less a degenerative (and literally unlivable) process than a siphoning process. 7. The technical downgrading of serial objects will be discussed in a moment; see also the section on 'Gadgets and Robots' above. 143 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S The fact is that the model is everywhere discernible in the series. It inhabits the slightest 'specific' difference between one object and the next. Above we noted the same tendency in collecting, where each item in a collection is marked by a relative difference which momentarily lends it a privileged status - the status, in effect, of a model; all such relative differences refer to all the others, and in aggregate they constitute absolute difference - or rather, fundamentally, just the idea of absolute difference, which is precisely what the Model is. We may say of a model that it exists or that it does not exist. The Facel-Vega certainly exists, yet all the variations in colour or capacity refer ultimately only to the idea of the Facel-Vega. Indeed, it is essential that the model be no more than the idea of the model. Only on this condition can it be present in every single relative difference, and thus integrate the whole series. If the Facel-Vega actually existed, the 'personalized' satisfaction to be derived from any other car would be radically compromised. On the other hand, the idealizing assumption that it exists serves as a justification and solid underpinning for personalization vis-à-vis something that is precisely not the Facel-Vega. The model is neither impoverished nor high-wrought: it is a generic image manufactured through the imaginary assumption of all relative differences. Its fascination stems directly from the tendency that causes the series to negate itself from one difference to the next; it is the fascination of intense movement, proliferating reference, never-ending substitution - in short, a formal idealization of transcendence. What is integrated and invested in the model is the whole evolution of the series. The fact that the model is just an idea is, moreover, the only thing that makes the actual process of personalization possible. The notion that consciousness could be personalized in an object is absurd: it is personalized, rather, in a difference, because only a difference, by referring to the absolute singularity of the Model, can thereby refer at the same time to what is really being signified here, namely the absolute singularity of the user, the buyer or (as we saw above) the collector. Para- doxically, then, it is through an idea that is both vague and shared by all that every- one may come to experience himself as unique. Reciprocally, it is only continual self-individualization on the basis of the range of serial distinctions that allows the imaginary consensus of the idea of the model to be revived. Personalization and integration go strictly hand in hand. That is the miracle of the system. 144 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S From the Model to the Series The Technical Deficit of the Serial Object Now that we have analysed the formal play of differences by means of which the serial object manifests itself, and is experienced, as model, it is time to examine the real differences that distinguish the model from the series. For naturally the upward tendency of differential valorization relative to the ideal model masks the inverse reality of the destructuring and drastic downgrading of the serial object relative to the real model. Of all the servitudes visited upon the serial object, the most obvious concerns its durability and its technical quality. The imperatives of personalization and production combined cause a proliferation of accessory features to the detriment of strict use value. The first effect of all the innovations and all the vagaries of fashion is to render objects more shoddy and ephemeral. Vance Packard points up this tendency, listing 'three different ways that products can be made obsolescent': Obsolescence of function. In this situation an existing product becomes outmoded when a product is introduced that performs the function better. Obsolescence of quality. Here, when it is planned, a product breaks down or wears out at a given time, usually not too distant. Obsolescence of desirability. In this situation a product that is still sound in terms of quality or performance becomes 'worn out' in our minds because a styling or other change makes it seem less desirable. The first type of obsolescence - the functional type - is certainly laudable... .8 The last two aspects of this scheme work together. The accelerated replacement of models itself affects the object's quality. Thus stockings may now come in all colours, but their quality will have declined (or perhaps research and development will have been cut back to finance an advertising campaign). Should the manipu- lated fluctuations of fashion fail to restimulate demand, recourse can be had to an 8. Vance Packard, The Waste Makers (New York: David McKay, 1960), p. 55. 145 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S artificial sub-functionality - to 'deliberately shoddy construction'. Packard quotes an industrial designer, Brooks Stevens, to the effect that 'Our whole economy is based on planned obsolescence, and everybody who can read without moving his lips should know it.'9 And he finds that Oliver Wendell Holmes was prophetically close to the mark 'when he wrote of that wonderful one-hoss shay which was built in such a logical way that on a given day "it went to pieces all at once"'.10 Thus certain American car parts are designed not to survive more than sixty thousand kilometres of driving. As manufacturers themselves will discreetly admit, the quality of most serial objects could be substantially improved with no significant increase in production costs. Deliberately debased parts are just as expensive to manufacture as normal o n e s . . . BUT THE OBJECT CANNOT BE ALLOWED TO ESCAPE FROM EPHEMERALITY OR FROM FASHION. This is the funda- mental characteristic of the series: the objects that compose it are weakened on a systematic basis. In a world of (relative) affluence, the shoddiness of objects replaces the scarcity of objects as the expression of poverty. The series is forcefully imposed for a brief cross-section of time; its universe is distinctly perishable, THE OBJECT CANNOT BE ALLOWED TO ESCAPE DEATH. Unfettered technological progress would doubtless override this mortality of the object, but the strategy of production strives constantly to maintain it.11 Ernest Dichter speaks, in connection with selling, of a 'strategy of desire'; we might well speak here of a strategy of frustration. These two strategies together serve to ensure the exclusive rule of the goals of production - indeed, production has now emerged as an all-surpassing agency with the power not merely of life but also of death over objects.12 The model, by contrast, is privileged in that it lasts (though only in a relative sense, for it too is caught in the speeded-up cycle of objects). It is granted solidity, 9. Ibid., p. 54. 10. Ibid., p. 57. 11. Of course this tendency is liable to be slowed by the operation of competition. But in countries (such as the United States) where monopolistic production is the norm, true competition has long been nonexistent. 12. It must nonetheless be acknowledged that this cynical strategic perspective is not the only villain here, for there is unquestionably a degree of willing compliance on the part of consumers. Many people would be disconcerted indeed at the prospect of having to keep the same car for twenty or thirty years, even if it continued to meet all their needs. On this point, see 'Gadgets and Robots' above. 146 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S entitled to 'loyalty'. Paradoxically, it has come to dominate an area traditionally reserved, it would seem, for the series, namely use value. This superiority of the model, reinforced by the influence of fashion - that is, the combination of technical and formal qualities - are what constitute its superior 'functionality'. The 'Style' Deficit of the Serial Object In parallel fashion, when we compare the serial object to the model we find that the serial object's physical attributes, just like its technical ones, are distinctly inferior. Consider the material used, for example: the steel and leather armchair on show at Airborne will crop up in aluminium and leatherette at Dubonbois Home Furnishings. The glass partition of a model interior will have a plastic echo in the serial version. Solid wood furniture will reappear in a whitewood veneer. A fine woollen or wild-silk dress will proliferate in ready-to-wear form in a wool mixture or in rayon. It is the heft, hardiness, grain or 'warmth' of a material whose presence or absence serves as a marker of difference. Such tactile characteristics are close to the most profound defining qualities of the model - far more so than the visual values of colour and form, which are more easily transposed to series because they are better suited to the needs of marginal differentiation. Of course, even colours and forms are never integrated unscathed into a series. Finish is wanting, as is inventiveness. Faithfully transposed as they may be, forms suffer a subtle loss of their originality. What the serial object lacks is thus less the material itself than a certain consistency between material and form which ensures the model's finished quality. In series this consistency, this set of necessary relations, is destroyed for the sake of the differentiating action of forms, colours and accessories. Style gives way to combination. The process of downgrading referred to above in connection with the technical aspect is here more of a destructuring tendency. In the case of the model object, details and the workings of details are not the point. Rolls-Royces are black, and that's that.13 The model is literally hors série, without peer - hence out of the game: only the 'personalization' of objects allows the play of differences to expand in proportion with the length of the series (as when 13. Or sometimes grey, it is true. But the 'moral' paradigm remains in place (see above, p. 31). 147 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S fifteen or twenty different shades are available for a single make of car); at the other extreme - the return to pure utility - the play of differences once more ceases to exist (for a very long time the Citroën 2CV came only in a grey that was hardly a colour at all). The model has a harmony, a unity, a homogeneity, a consistency of space, form, substance, and function; it is, in short, a syntax. The serial object is merely juxtaposition, haphazard combination, inarticulate discourse. As a de totalized form, it is nothing more than a collection of details relating in mechanical fashion to parallel series. Suppose that the uniqueness of the aforementioned armchair lies in its particular combination of tawny leather, black steel, general silhouette and mobilization of space. The corresponding serial object will emerge with plasticized leather, no tawniness, the metal lighter or galvanized, the overall configuration altered and the relationship to space diminished. The object as a whole is thus destructured: its substance is assigned to the series of objects in imitation leather, its tawniness is now a brown common to thousands of other objects, its legs are indistinguishable from those of any tubular chair, and so on. The object is no longer anything more than a conglomeration of details and the crossroads of a variety of series. Here is another example: a luxury car is in a red described as 'unique'. What 'unique' implies here is not simply that this red can be found nowhere else, but also that it is one with the car's other attributes: the red is not an 'extra'. But no sooner does this colour appear ever so slightly changed on a more 'commercial' car than it becomes the red of thousands of others - a mere detail or accessory feature of cars that are red as an 'extra', because they might just as well be green or black. Class Differences By now the reader should be getting a better feel for the distinction between model and series. More even than its consistency, it is the nuancing of the model that makes it distinctive. At present we are witnessing an attempt to stylize serial interiors - to 'bring good taste to the masses'. The result, generally speaking, is 'all in the same colour' and 'all in the same style': one may have a 'baroque living-room', a 'kitchen in blue', etc. What is presented as a 'style', however, is fundamentally a mere stereotype, the unnuanced generalization of a particular detail or aspect. The fact is that the nuance (within a unity) has come to characterize the model, while difference 148 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S (within uniformity) has come to characterize the series. Nuances in this sense are infinite in number, being emphases ever susceptible of reinvention in accordance with an open-ended syntax. Differences are finite in number, being the result of systematic variations on a single paradigm. Let us not be misled by the apparent scarcity of nuances and the apparent profusion of differences (due to their massive dissemination), for structurally speaking the fact remains that nuances are in- exhaustible (the model in this connection may be said to come close to the work of art), whereas the serial difference is part of a finite combinatorial system or tablature which, though it no doubt changes continually in response to fashion, is neverthe- less, for each synchronic moment considered, limited by and strictly subject to the dictates of production. In sum, the series offers the immense majority of people a restricted range of choices, while a tiny minority enjoy access to the model and its infinite nuances. For the majority a range which, however extensive it may be, is composed of invariable elements - generally the most obvious ones; for the minority a multitude of random possibilities. For the majority a set code of values; for the minority endless invention. We are thus indeed clearly dealing with class status and class distinctions. The redundancy of its secondary features is an attempt to compensate for the serial object's loss of essential qualities. Colours, contrasts and the 'modern' look are thus overloaded with significance; indeed, the serial object's modernity is stressed at the precise moment when the model is sloughing modernity off. Whereas the model retains an airiness, a discretion, and a 'naturalness' that is the epitome of culture, the serial object remains stuck fast in its quest for uniqueness, and betrays a constrained culture, an optimism in the worst of taste, and an empty- headed humanism. For the serial object has its own class-specific script, its own rhetoric - just as the model has its own rhetoric of reticence, veiled functionality, perfection and eclecticism.14 14. In a system of this kind the two opposing terms cannot help but carry a surplus of meaning, for each is defined by reference to the other, and is to that extent redundant. Moreover, this redundancy of surplus mean- ing is the thing which, from the psycho-sociological point of view, defines the mode in which the system is directly experienced; although the present account may occasionally suggest the contrary, this can never be a system of pure structural oppositions. 149 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Another expression of this redundancy is accumulation. There are always too many objects in serial interiors. And too many objects means too little space. Promiscuity or saturation occur as reactions to scarcity. Loss of quality must be made up for by the sheer number of objects.15 The model has its own space, in which objects are neither too close to one another nor too far apart. The model interior is given structure by these relative distances, and if anything it tends towards the opposite kind of redundancy: connotation by emptiness.16 The Present as Privilege Another axis of comparison in distinguishing model from series is time. We have noted that the serial object is designed not to last. Just like generations of people in underdeveloped societies, generations of objects in consumer society are short- lived, and one very soon gives way to the next. Where the abundance of objects increases, it always does so under the constraints of a calculated scarcity. That, however, is the problem of the object's technical durability. The immediate experience of the object, as determined by fashion, is another matter. A rapid sociological examination of the market in antiques reveals that it is governed by the same laws and organized fundamentally in accordance with the same model/series scheme as the market in 'industrial' products. It emerges that within the potpourri which, in the case of furniture, includes everything from baroque to Chippendale, from Medici writing-tables to Art Nouveau and fake rustic, it is always possible (given the necessary financial resources and culture) to go higher and higher up the ladder of 'established' values in search of the focus of one's 'personal' mooring back in history. There is a status attached to regression in time, and one's means are liable to determine whether one acquires a genuine ancient Greek vase or a mere reproduction, a Roman amphora or a Spanish pitcher. 15. The bourgeois tradition inclined naturally towards redundancy and accumulation (bourgeois houses were often stuffed to the rafters). The more 'functional' approach of modern interior design runs counter to that tendency, however, so that the over-occupation of space in a modern house is more seriously inconsistent than in a traditional one. 16. See the discussion of 'formal connotation' above, pp. 59 ff. 150 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S In the world of objects the past and the exotic have a social dimension, a relation- ship to culture and income. The leisured classes go to their antique dealers for medieval, haute époque or French Regency furniture; the cultivated middle classes scour flea-market junk stalls for the wherewithal to re-create a solidly bourgeois cultural décor with 'authentic' peasant touches; and rustic themes are just perfect for service-sector employees enamoured of the largely bourgeoisified country interiors of the previous generation, or of provincial 'period styles' that are really hybrid forms impossible to date and having nothing but the vaguest echo of a 'period'. Each social class thus has its very own cut-price museum. Only workers and peasants still largely shun antiques. True, they have neither the leisure nor the money required, but the chief reason is that they are not as yet touched by the acculturation phenomenon affecting other classes. (Not that they consciously refuse it - rather, they simply fall outside its sphere of influence.) Nor, however, do they care for the modern and the 'experimental', for new 'creations' or for anything 'avant-garde'. Their own museum is often limited to cheap hardware and a folk- loric world of china or earthenware animals, gewgaws, decorated mugs, framed mementoes, and the like - a whole stereotyped iconography quite liable to be found cheek by jowl with the very last word in electrical household appliances. This is in no way to downplay the need to 'personalize' - which is the same for all; it is just that the only people who can regress in time are those who can afford it. Difference - in this case culturalized difference - is what creates value, and it has to be paid for. Models and series are just as easy to find in the realm of cultural nostalgia as in the immediacy of fashion. If we look to see what in this range of possibilities has the maximum value, we find that it is either the most avant-garde of objects or objects from the past with an aristocratic dimension: either a glass-and-aluminium villa with elliptical contours or an eighteenth-century château - either the ideal future or the ancien régime. Conversely the pure series, the unmarked term, is located, not exactly in the present, which is, along with the future, the time of the avant-garde and of the model, nor in that transcendent past which is the preserve of the well-to-do and their acquired culture, but instead in an 'immediate' past, an indefinite past which is fundamentally a sort of belated present, a limbo into which yesterday's models 151 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S have just recently fallen. In clothing styles the pace of change is very rapid, and the office workers of today wear dresses derived from last season's haute couture models. In furnishing, however, what has wide currency in the present is whatever was in high fashion a few years or even a generation ago. Serial time here is always the time of the wave before, so to speak. As far as their furniture is concerned, most people live in a time which is not theirs, a time of generality, of insignificance, the time of that which is not modern but not yet antique (and, no doubt, never will be antique): the equivalent in time of suburban impersonality in space. By comparison with the model the series does not stand merely for a loss of unique- ness of style, of nuances, and of authenticity: it stands also for the loss of the real dimension of time - for it belongs to a kind of empty sector of everyday life, a negative realm automatically filled up with senescent models. For only models change; series merely follow upon one another in the wake of a model with which they can never catch up. That is where their true unreality lies. A Misadventure of the Person 'The product now in demand is neither a staple nor a machine, it is a personality/ according to David Riesman.17 Personal achievement is indeed an obligation haunting the modern consumer in the context of the forced mobility imposed by the model/series system (which is, incidentally, but one aspect of a much larger structure of social mobility and aspiration). In the area which concerns us here, this constraint is paradoxical: it is clear that in the act of personalized consumption the subject, in his very insistence on being a subject, succeeds in manifesting himself only as an object of economic demand. His project, filtered and fragmented in advance, is dashed by the very process that is supposed to realize it. Since 'specific differences' are produced on an industrial scale, any choice he can make is ossified from the outset; only the illusion of personal distinctiveness remains. In seeking 17. David Riesman, in collaboration with Reuel Denny and Nathan Glazer, The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character (New Haven: Yale University Press/London: Geoffrey Cumberlege, Oxford University Press, 1950), p. 46. 152 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S to add that 'something' which will make for uniqueness, consciousness is reified in an even more intimate way, precisely because it is reified right down to that particular detail. Such is the paradox of alienation: a living choice is embodied in dead differences, indulgence in which dooms the subjective project to self-negation and despair. This is the ideological function of the system: increasing status is nothing but a game, for all differences are integrated in advance. The very deceit with which the whole arrangement is shot through is an integral part of that arrangement, on account of the system's perpetual forward flight. Yet are we quite justified in speaking of alienation here? Overall, the system of manipulated personalization is experienced by the vast majority of consumers as freedom. Only to a critical eye does this freedom appear merely formal, and the process of personalization as a misadventure of the person. Even in cases where advertising motivates on the basis of nothing at all (as where the same product goes by different brand names, where differences are illusory or where quality is erratic) - even where the choice is undoubtedly a trap - it still cannot be denied that even superficial differences are real as soon as someone invests them with value. How can we contest the satisfaction of a person who buys a dustbin deco- rated with flowers or an 'antimagnetic' razor? No theory of needs can authorize us to assign priority to one actually experienced satisfaction over any other. If the demand for self-worth is so deep-seated that in the absence of any alternative it embodies itself in a 'personalized' object, what basis do we have for rejecting this tendency, and in the name of what 'authentic' essential value could we do so? The Ideology of Models The system we have been describing reposes upon an ideology of democracy; it claims to be an aspect of social progress - to be what makes it possible for all gradually to gain access to models by virtue of a continual sociological upward movement which is carrying each stratum of society in turn to greater material luxury, and, from one 'personalized' difference to the next, ever closer to the absolute model. 153 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Two objections may be raised to this account of things. In the first place, we find that we are in fact, in our 'consumer society', farther and farther away from equality before the object. The idea of the model has been obliged to seek refuge, concretely, in ever more subtle and definitive differences: such and such a skirt length, such and such a shade of red, such and such an advance in stereophony, or the few weeks that separate haute couture from mass distribution courtesy of Prisunic. All extremely ephemeral things - yet all very expensive indeed. A seeming equality attaches to the fact that all objects obey the same 'functional' imperative. But, as we have seen, this formal democratization of cultural status conceals other inequalities which are far more serious in that they affect the very reality of the object, its technical quality, its substance and its life-span. The privileges of the model are no longer institutional, it is true; they have, as it were, been internalized - but this has merely made them more tenacious. Just as, in the wake of the bourgeois revolution, no other classes ever gradually acquired posi- tions of political responsibility, so likewise, in the wake of the industrial revolution, consumers have never won equality before the object. The second point is that it is a delusion to take the model for an ideal point which the series will eventually be able to rejoin. The possession of objects frees us only as possessors, and always refers us back to the infinite freedom to possess more objects: the only progression possible here is up the ladder of objects, but this is a ladder that leads nowhere, being itself responsible for nourishing the inaccessible abstraction of the model. For the model is basically merely an idea, that is, a transcendence internal to the system - and the system in its entirety can continue in its forward flight indefinitely. There is no prospect of a model entering a series without being simultaneously replaced by another model. The whole system proceeds en bloc, but models replace one another without ever being transcended as such and without successive series, for their part, ever achieving self-transcendence as series. Models move along faster than series: they inhabit the present, whereas series float somewhere between past and present, wearing themselves out in the vain attempt to catch up with models. This perpetual cycle of aspiration and disillusion, dynamically orchestrated at the level of production, constitutes the arena in which objects are pursued. 154 M O D E L S A N D S E R I E S There is a kind of inevitability at work here. Once a whole society articulates itself around models and focuses on them; once production strives in every way possible towards the systematic breaking down of models into series, and series in their turn into marginal differences or combinative variants, until at last objects come to have a status just as ephemeral as that of words or images; once the systematic stretching of series turns the whole edifice into a paradigm, but a paradigm whose ordering is irreversible, in that the ladder of status is fixed and the rules of the game of status are the same for everyone; once we fall under the sway of this managed convergence, this planned flimsiness, this continually eroded synchrony - then all negation becomes impossible. There are no more overt contradictions, no more structural changes, no more social dialectics. For the ten- dency which seems, in accordance with technical progress, to mobilize the whole system in no way challenges that system's ability to remain unmoving and stable in itself. Everything is in movement, everything shifts before our eyes, everything is continually being transformed - yet nothing really changes. This is a society whose embrace of technological progress enables it to make every conceivable revolution, just so long as those revolutions are confined within its bounds. For all its increased productivity, our society does not open the door to one single structural change. 155 II Credit Rights and Duties of the Consumer-Citizen Today, then, objects appear under the sign of differentiation and choice - but they also appear (or at least, all key objects do) under the sign of credit. When you buy something you certainly have to pay for it, but the choice is yours 'free', and by the same token credit terms are proposed as a free gift, as a kind of bonus from the world of production. The unstated assumption is that credit is the consumer's right, and ultimately an economic right of the citizen. Restriction of any kind on the possibility of buying on credit is felt to be a retaliatory measure on the part of the State; to do away with such arrangements - which is in any case unthinkable - would be experienced by society at large as the abolition of a freedom. For advertising, credit is a decisive argument in the 'strategy of desire', and its role is comparable in every way to any other quality of the object on offer; it is on a par in customer motivation with choice, 'personalization' and the rhetoric of promotion, of which last it is the tactical complement. The way in which the model is antici- pated in the series is paralleled in the case of credit by the enjoyment of objects ahead of time; the psychological context is the same. In principle the credit system does not affect the serial object more or less than 156 C R E D I T it affects the model, and there is nothing to stop anyone buying a Jaguar on hire purchase. In actuality, however, custom decrees that the de luxe model be paid for cash down; things bought on credit tend simply not to be models. There is a logic of status according to which the prestige of a cash purchase is one of the privileges of the model, while the constraint of periodic payments contributes to the psychological shortfall associated with the serial object. A certain puritanism has long sensed some moral danger in credit, and placed on-the-spot payment among the bourgeois virtues. It must be admitted, however, that psychological resistance of this kind is gradually diminishing. Where it persists, it is merely a relic of a traditional notion of property, and largely confined to the class of small owners still faithful to the notions of inheritance, thrift and the family future. These survivals are sure to die out in time. Once property had priority over use; now the reverse is true, and the extension of credit, among other phenomena defined by David Riesman, marks the gradual transition from an 'acquisitive' civilization to a practical one. Credit customers are gradually learning how to make use of objects in complete freedom as though they were already 'theirs'. The difference, of course, is that while such objects are being paid for they are simultaneously wearing out: the final payment-due date is not unrelated to the 'replacement-due' date - indeed, as we know, some American firms strive to make the two intervening periods coincide exactly. There is always the risk, therefore, as in the event of defectiveness or loss, that an object will be, so to speak, used up before it is paid up. Even when credit seems to have been perfectly integrated into everyday life, this danger is the basis of an insecurity that was never experienced in connection with the 'patrimonial' object. Such an object was mine: I owed nothing. An object bought on credit will be mine when I have paid for it: it is conjugated, as it were, in the future perfect. The anxiety that attaches to periodic payments is very specific. It eventually sets in train a parallel process which weighs down on us day after day even though we never become conscious of the objective relationship involved. It haunts the human project, not immediate practice. An object that is mortgaged escapes us in time, and has in fact escaped us from the outset. It flees us, and its flight echoes that of the serial object ever vainly striving towards the model. This dual 157 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S movement of things away from our grasp is what creates the latent fragility and ever-imminent disappointments of the world of objects that surrounds us. In the end the credit system merely exemplifies what is a very general way of relating to objects in the modern context. Indeed, it is quite possible to live on credit without sitting amid a year's worth of credit invoices for car, fridge and television, because the model /series mechanism, with its obligatory orientation towards the model, is a handicap in its own right. This mechanism governs the realm of social advancement, which consequently becomes a realm of handicapped aspiration. We are forever behindhand relative to our objects. They are here before us, yet they are already a year away, located either in that final payment or else in the next model by which they are bound to be replaced. So credit simply transfers a basic psycho- logical situation onto the economic plane; the obligation to follow a sequence is the same at both levels, whether it is economic, as with successive hire-purchase payments, or psycho-sociological, as in the systematic and ever-accelerating succession of series and models. In any event, we experience our objects in a pre- defined, mortgaged temporal mode. If there are now barely any restrictions on the use of credit, perhaps the reason is that all our objects today are apprehended as if they were obtained on credit, as debts incurred to society as a whole - debts that are always susceptible of adjustment, always fluctuating, always prey to chronic inflation and devaluation. Much in the same way as our earlier discussion of 'personalization' led us to conclude that this was far more than an advertising gimmick, that it was in fact a key ideological notion, so likewise credit must be viewed as far more than a financial arrangement, for it is nothing less than a fundamental dimension of our society and in effect a new ethical system. The Precedence of Consumption: A New Ethic A single generation has witnessed the eclipse of the notions of patrimony and of fixed capital. Until our parents' generation, objects once acquired were owned in the full sense, for they were the material expression of work done. It is still not very long since buying a dining-table and chairs, or a car, represented the end-point of a sustained exercise of thrift. People worked dreaming of what they might later 158 C R E D I T acquire; life was lived in accordance with the puritan notion of effort and its reward - and objects finally won represented repayment for the past and security for the future. They were, in short, a capital. Today objects are with us before they are earned, they steal a march on the sum total of effort, of labour, that they embody, so that in a sense their consumption precedes their production. True, these objects, which I merely make use of, no longer impose any patrimonial responsi- bility on me; they are bequeathed to me by nobody and I, in turn, shall bequeath them to nobody. They do, however, exert another kind of constraint, for they hang over me as debts as yet unsettled. If they no longer locate me in a relationship to a family or customary group, I am nevertheless brought into relation through them with society at large and its agencies (the economic and financial order, the fluctuations of fashion, and so forth). And I must pay for them over and over again, month by month, or replace them every year. This means that everything has changed: the significance these objects have for me, the projects they embody, their objective future, and mine. It is worth pondering the fact that for centuries generations of people succeeded one another in an unchanging décor of objects which were longer-lived than they, whereas now many generations of objects will follow upon one another at an ever-accelerating pace during a single human lifetime. Where once man imposed his rhythm upon objects, now objects impose their disjointed rhythm - their unpredictable and sudden manner of being present, of breaking down or replacing one another without ever aging - upon human beings. Thus the status of a whole civilization changes along with the way in which its everyday objects make themselves present and the way in which they are enjoyed. In a patriarchal domestic economy founded on inheritance and stable rents, consumption could never conceivably precede production. In accordance with good Cartesian and moral logic, work preceded its fruit as cause precedes effect. That ascetic mode of accumulation, rooted in forethought, in sacrifice, and in a resorption of needs that created great tension within the individual, was the foundation of a whole civilization of thrift which enjoyed its own heroic period before expiring in the anachronistic figure of the rentier - indeed, of the ruined rentier, who in this century has perforce learnt the historical lesson of the vanity of traditional morality and traditional economic calculation. By dint of living within 159 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S their means, whole generations have ended up living far below their means. Work, merit, accumulation - all the virtues of an era whose pinnacle was the concept of property are still discernible in the objects that stand as witness to that time, objects whose lost generations continue to haunt the petty-bourgeois interior. The Obligation to Buy Today a new morality has been born. Precedence of consumption over accumu- lation, forward flight, forced investment, speeded-up consumption, chronic inflation (implying the absurdity of saving) - these are the motors of our whole present system of buying first and paying off later in labour. Credit has thus brought us back to a situation that is in fact feudal in character, reminiscent as it is of the arrangement under which a portion of labour would be allocated in advance, as serf labour, to the feudal lord. There is a difference, however, for our system, unlike feudalism, reposes on complicity: modern consumers spontaneously embrace and accept the unending constraint that is imposed on them. They buy so that society can continue to produce, this so that they can continue to work, and this in turn so that they can pay for what they have bought. Witness the following American advertising slogans, noted by Vance Packard, which make the point very well: 'Buy days mean pay days - and pay days mean better days!'; 'Buy now - the job you save may be your own!'; 'Buy your way to prosperity!'18 The illusionism is truly remarkable: society appears to extend credit to you in exchange for a formal freedom, but in reality it is you who are giving credit to society, alienating your future in the process. Of course the system of production still depends fundamentally on the exploitation of labour-power, but today it is strongly reinforced by the circular consensus or collusion whereby subjection itself is experienced as freedom, and is thus transformed into an independent and durable system. In every individual the consumer colludes with the production system while having no relationship to the producer - the victim of the system - that he also is. Paradoxically, this split between producer and consumer is the 18. The Waste Makers, p. 17. 160 C R E D I T mainstay of social integration, because everything is done so that it can never take the living and critical form of a contradiction. The Miracle of Buying The advantage of credit (as of advertising) is indeed the dual dimension it bestows upon buying and its objective determinants. Buying on credit amounts to the total appropriation of an object for a fraction of its real value. A minimal investment for a profit out of all proportion to it. Payments are relegated to a dimly perceived future, and the object is acquired in exchange for a symbolic gesture. This trans- action mirrors the behaviour of the mythomaniac, who for the price of a made-up story receives a quite disproportionate measure of attention from his audience. His real investment is minimal, while the benefits are extraordinary, for he acquires all the virtues of reality on the strength, practically speaking, of a mere sign. He too lives on credit - in the shape of the credulousness of other people. Now this inversion of the normal way of transforming reality - which proceeds from work to the product of work, and founds the traditional temporality of the logic of knowledge as of everyday praxis - this premature reaping of benefits is nothing less than magical. Likewise, what the buyer consumes and appropriates thanks to credit, along with the object prematurely acquired, is the myth of magical functionality promoted by the only society capable of offering him such possibilities of immediate self-realization. Naturally, he will very soon come face to face with socio-economic reality, just as the mythomaniac must sooner or later confront the spuriousness of his claims. Once unmasked, the mythomaniac either collapses or takes refuge in another tall tale. The buyer on the never-never is similarly liable to run up against unmeetable payment-due dates, and there is a good chance that he will seek psychological reassurance in this situation by buying some other item on credit. Forward flight is usual with this kind of behaviour, and the marvellous thing is that no causal connection is ever made, either by the mythomaniac between the story he tells and the failure he eventually experiences (for he learns nothing from this cold dash of reality), or by the buyer on credit between the gratification he obtains magically from his purchase and the payments he must subsequently 161 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S meet. In this respect the credit system is the acme of man's irresponsibility towards himself: the buyer alienates the payer, and even though they are in fact the same person, the system ensures, by separating them in time, that they never become aware of the fact. The Ambiguity of the Domestic Object In sum, credit pretends to promote a civilization of modern consumers at last freed from the constraints of property, but in reality it institutes a whole system of integration which combines social mythology with brutal economic pressure. Credit is an ethic, but it is also a politics. The tactic of credit works in tandem with that of personalization to give objects a socio-political function they never used to have. We no longer live in the age of serfdom or in the age of usury, but both these constraints have been incorporated in abstract and amplified form into the realm of credit. Credit is a social realm, a temporal realm, a realm of things by virtue of which, and by virtue of the strategy that imposes it, objects are able to fulfil their function as accelerators and multipliers of tasks, satisfactions and expenditures. They thus become a kind of trampoline, their very inertia serving as a centrifugal force which lends everyday life its rhythm - its tendency to forward flight, its precariousness and disequilibrium. At the same time, objects, on which domesticity once depended as a means of escape from the pressures of society, now on the contrary serve to shackle the domestic universe to the circuits and constraints of the social one. By means of credit - which is a free gift and a formal freedom but also a social sanction, a form of subjection and a fatality at the very heart of things - domesticity is directly colonized: it acquires a kind of social dimension, but in the very worst sense. The most extreme and absurd effects of credit are eloquent: for example, when car payments are so pressing that the buyer cannot afford petrol for his vehicle, we have reached the point where the human project, filtered and fragmented by economic pressures, begins to feed upon itself. A fundamental truth about the present system emerges here too: objects now are by no means meant to be owned and used but solely to be produced and bought. In other words, they are structured as a 162 C R E D I T function neither of needs nor of a more rational organization of the world, but instead constitute a system determined entirely by an ideological regime of production and social integration. Indeed, private objects properly so called no longer exist: thanks to their multiple use, it is the social order of production, with its own particular complicities, which now haunts the intimate world of the consumer and his consciousness. This penetration also marks the fading of any prospect of effectively contesting or transcending that social order. 163 Ill Advertising Discourse on Objects and Discourse-As-Object Any analysis of the system of objects must ultimately imply an analysis of discourse about objects - that is to say, an analysis of promotional 'messages' (comprising image and discourse). For advertising is not simply an adjunct to the system of objects; it cannot be detached therefrom, nor can it be restricted to its 'proper' function (there is no such thing as advertising strictly confined to the supplying of information). Indeed, advertising is now an irremovable aspect of the system of objects precisely by virtue of its disproportionateness. This lack of proportion is the 'functional' apotheosis of the system. Advertising in its entirety constitutes a useless and unnecessary universe. It is pure connotation. It contributes nothing to production or to the direct practical application of things, yet it plays an integral part in the system of objects, not merely because it relates to consumption but also because it itself becomes an object to be consumed. A clear distinction must be drawn in connection with advertising's dual status as a discourse on the object and as an object in its own right. It is as a useless, unnecessary discourse that it comes to be consumable as a cultural object. What achieves autonomy and fulfilment 164 A D V E R T I S I N G through advertising is thus the whole system that I have been describing at the level of objects: the entire apparatus of personalization and imposed differentiation; of proliferation of the inessential and subordination of technical requirements to the requirements of production and consumption; of dysfunctionality and secondary functionality. Since its function is almost entirely secondary and since both image and discourse play largely allegorical roles in it, advertising supplies us with the ideal object and casts a particularly revealing light upon the system of objects. And since, like all heavily connoted systems, it is self-referential,19 we may safely rely on advertising to tell us what it is that we consume through objects. Advertising in the Indicative and in the Imperative Advertising sets itself the task of supplying information about particular products and promoting their sale. In principle this 'objective' function is still its fundamental purpose.20 The supplying of information has nevertheless given way to persuasion - even to what Vance Packard calls 'hidden persuasion', the aim of which is a completely managed consumption. The supposed threat this poses of a totalitarian conditioning of man and his needs has provoked great alarm. Studies have shown, however, that advertising's pervasive power is not as great as had been supposed. A saturation point is in fact soon reached: competing messages tend to cancel each other out, and many claims fail to convince on account of their sheer excessiveness. Moreover, injunctions and exhortations give rise to all kinds of counter-motivations and resistances, whether rational or irrational, among them the refusal of passivity, the desire not to be 'taken over', negative reactions to hyperbole, to repetition, and so on. in short, the discourse of advertising is just as likely to dissuade as to persuade, and consumers, though not entirely immune, appear to exercise a good deal of discretion when it comes to the advertising message. Having said this, let us not be misled by the avowed aim of that message; while advertising may well fail to sell the consumer on a particular brand - Omo, 19. See Roland Barthes's account of the system of fashion: Système de la mode (Paris: Seuil, 1967). 20. We should not forget, however, that the earliest advertisements were for miracle cures, home remedies, and the like; they supplied information, therefore, but information only of the most tendentious kind. 165 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Simca or Frigidaire - it does sell him on something else, something much more fundamental to the global social order than Omo or Frigidaire - something, indeed, for which such brand names are merely a cover. Just as the object's function may ultimately amount merely t a the provision of a justification for the latent meanings that the object imposes, sojin advertising (and all the more so inasmuch as it is the more purely connotative system) the product designated - that is, its denotation or description - tends to be merely an effective mask concealing a confused process of integration. So even though we may be getting better and better at resisting advertising in the imperative, we are at the same time becoming ever more susceptible to adver- tising in the indicative - that is, to its actual existence as a product to be consumed at a secondary level, and as the clear expression of a culture. It is in this sense that we do indeed 'believe7 in advertising: what we consume in this way is the luxury of a society that projects itself as an agency for dispensing goods and 'transcends itself in a culture. We are thus taken over ät one and the same time by an established agency and by that agency's self-image. The Logic of Father Christmas Those who pooh-pooh the ability of advertising and of the mass media in general to condition people have failed to grasp the peculiar logic upon which the media's efficacy reposes. For this is not a logic of propositions and proofs, but a logic of fables and of the willingness to go along with them. We do not believe in such fables, but we cleave to them nevertheless. Basically, the 'demonstration' of a product convinces no one, but it does serve to rationalize its purchase, which in any case either precedes or overwhelms all rational motives. Without 'believing' in the product, therefore, we believe in the advertising that tries to get us to believe in it. We are for all the world like children in their attitude towards Father Christmas. Children hardly ever wonder whether Father Christmas exists or not, and they certainly never look upon getting presents as an effect of which that existence is the cause: rather, their belief in Father Christmas is a rationalizing confabulation designed to extend earliest infancy's miraculously gratifying relationship with the parents 166 A D V E R T I S I N G (and particularly with the mother) into a later stage of childhood. That miraculous relationship, though now in actuality past, is internalized in the form of a belief which is in effect an ideal extension of it. There is nothing artificial about the romance of Father Christmas, however, for it is based upon the shared interest that the two parties involved have in its preservation. Father Christmas himself is un- important here, and the child only believes in him precisely because of that basic lack of significance. What children are actually consuming through this figure, fiction or cover story (which in a sense they continue to believe in even after they have ceased to do so) is the action of a magical parental solicitude and the care taken by the parents to continue colluding with their children's embrace of the fable. Christmas presents themselves serve merely to underwrite this compromise.21 /Advertising functions in much the same way. Neither its rhetoric nor even the informational aspect of its discourse has a decisive effect on the buyer. What the individual does respond to, on the other hand, is advertising's underlying leitmotiv of protection and gratification, the intimation that its solicitations and attempts to persuade are the sign, indecipherable at the conscious level, that somewhere there is an agency (a social agency in the event, but one that refers directly to the image of the mother) which has taken it upon itself to inform him of his own desires, and to foresee and rationalize these desires to his own satisfaction. He thus no more 'believes' in advertising than the child believes in Father Christmas, but this in no way impedes his capacity to embrace an internalized infantile situation, and to act accordingly. vHerein lies the very real effectiveness of advertising, founded on its obedience to a logic which, though not that of the conditioned reflex, is nonetheless very rigorous: a logic of belief and regression.22 21. One is reminded of the neutral substances or placebos that doctors sometimes prescribe for psychoso- matic patients. Quite often these patients make just as good a recovery after the administration of such inac- tive elements as they do after taking real medicine. What is it that such patients derive or assimilate from the placebo? The answer is the idea of medicine plus the presence of the physician: the mother and the father simultaneously. Here too, then, belief facilitates the retrieval of an infantile situation, the result being the regressive resolution of a psychosomatic conflict. 22. Such an approach might well be extended to mass communications in general, though this is not the place to attempt it. 167 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Society as Maternal Agency: Airborne's Armchair Sometimes this mythology is quite explicit in the discourse of advertising.23 Consider a flyer put out by Airborne, specialists in armchairs, sofas and seating in general. 'True Comfort Cannot Be Improvised', runs the title. We are being warned here against the easy solution: comfort is not passivity, but has to be actively 'created' if passivity is to become possible. The text which follows immediately stresses Airborne's modern and scientific virtues: A good seat is a combination of four different factors: aesthetics, comfort, sturdiness and finish. .. . The creation of a masterpiece of this kind calls for something beyond the skills of the traditional craftsman. Not that those skills are now dispensable; on the contrary, they still lie at the very heart of the furniture maker's trade.... The past is thus the guarantee of a kind of moral security: tradition is at once preserved and surpassed by the industrial revolution. But 'in this day and age a good seat has to be manufactured according to the means and methods decreed by the economics of the modern world'. In other words, this armchair cannot be just an armchair. Its purchaser must feel himself at one with a technological society (a society, of course, whose norms are nevertheless kept secret from him). The armchair makes him into a citizen of industrial society. This company, now meeting the comfort needs of thousands of French house- holds, has become an entire industry in its own right, complete with its own research departments, engineers and creative artists, not to mention its machines, its stocks of raw materials, its after-sales service agencies, its sales network, etc. The consumer needs to be fully aware that the industrial revolution took place for his benefit, that today all the structures of society are embodied in the qualities of this armchair, qualities which themselves come together in his own individual personality. In this way a whole universe is constituted which from his point 23. This is by no means necessary, however - the advertising image alone can easily convey it. 168 A D V E R T I S I N G of view is governed by the sole sublime aim of ensuring his satisfaction. This perspective is confirmed as Airborne's advertising copy continues: 'A good arm- chair is a seat in which every family member feels at ease. There is no need to adjust it to your weight or height, for it is designed to wed the shape of your body/ There is no need to change anything in society or in yourself, because the industrial revolution has occurred, and technological society in its entirety adapts itself to you via this armchair so perfectly matched to your body's contours. There was a time when moral norms demanded that the individual adapt to society at large, but from the standpoint of an age of consumption - or a would-be age of consumption - such requirements belong to the outmoded ideology of the age of production; nowadays it is society as a whole which must adapt to the individual. What is more, society does not merely estimate the individual's needs and adapt to this or that particular need; rather, it is at pains to adapt to the individual himself, personally: 'You can always tell an Airborne seat from the fact that, when you sit in it, it is always YOUR armchair, YOUR chair or YOUR sofa, and you always get that comfortable feeling of being in a seat made exactly to measure for you alone/ To put all this metasociology of compliance in a nutshell: by virtue of this armchair's devotion, submissiveness and secret affinities with you personally, you will come to believe also in the devotion of Airborne's owner, his technical services, and so on and so forth. In this armchair, which is frankly quite pleasant to sit in (it is truly very functional), you are thus expected to apprehend the essence of a society that is definitively civilized, a society irreversibly committed to the idea of happiness - to YOUR happiness - and a society that spontaneously supplies each of its members with the wherewithal to achieve their own self-realization. This ideological discourse extends even to consideration of materials and forms. Airborne's advertising evokes 'new materials which effectively embody the style of today'. 'After the Stone Age and the Age of Wood, we are now living, as far as furnishing is concerned, in the Steel Age.' 'Steel provides the structure.' And so on. But though steel may be exciting, it is also a rather hard substance, rather too closely associated with effort, with the necessity for the individual to adapt. So, sure enough, it has to be hastily transfigured, rendered pliant - the 'structure' has to be humanized: 169 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S Though solid and unyielding, steel is suppleness itself when it is transformed into a set of springs. Once overlaid with genuine latex foam, it is soft and comfortable. And aesthetic too - because it may be wedded perfectly [again!] with the warmth of today's fabrics. Structure is always violent, and distressingly so. Even at the level of the object it threatens to compromise the individual's relationship to society. To pacify reality, an appearance of peacefulness must be preserved. In order to please you, the Airborne armchair is thus transmuted by a seemingly natural process from steel to fabric, becoming a mirror of strength and tranquillity. And of course, to complete the picture, 'aesthetics' envelops 'structure', and celebrates the definitive wedding of the object to your 'personality'. Here again a rhetoric of substances is the vehicle of social conditioning. In this structure become form, in this quieted tenacity, in this ubiquitous 'nuptial' synthesis with its interplay between contentment and the memory of a will, in this phallic phantasy of violence (steel) which is, as it were, calmed and lulled by its own image - surely it is impossible not to discern, in all these, a pattern of global collusion with the world, implying a complete resolution of all tensions in a maternal and harmonious society. It is not, therefore, that advertising 'alienates' or 'mystifies' us with its claims, words or images; rather, we are swayed by the fact that 'they' are sufficiently con- cerned to want to address us, to show us things, to take an interest in us. Riesman24 and other critical theorists of American society have clearly shown how products are increasingly judged not by their intrinsic value but instead by the concern for one's existence that they imply on the part of the manufacturer, by the solicitude the advertiser demonstrates for the public.25 Individuals are gradually conditioned by their ceaseless consumption - at once gratifying and frustrating, glorious and guilt-inducing - of the social body in its totality. What advertising bestows upon objects, the quality without which 'they 24. The Lonely Crowd (see above, p. 152, note 17), pp. 210 ff. 25. In the case of radio programmes sponsored by a particular product, for example, the advertising injunc- tion itself may be quite minimal as compared with the emotional collusion involved; indeed, it may amount to no more than a statement of the type 'This programme comes to you courtesy of Brand X'. 170 A D V E R T I S I N G would not be what they are', is 'warmth'. Warmth is a modern property which we have already identified as the basis of 'atmosphere': just as colours are hot or cold (rather than red or green); just as the 'controlling dimension of personality'26 (in an 'other-directed' society) is the 'warm-cold axis'; so likewise objects are hot or cold, that is to say, indifferent and hostile, or spontaneous, sincere and communicative - in a word, they are 'personalized'. They no longer present themselves as appro- priate to some strictly circumscribed task - a crude and outdated practice; instead they submit themselves to us, they seek us out, surround us, and prove their existence to us by virtue of the profusion of ways in which they appear, by virtue of their effusiveness. We are taken as the object's aims, and the object loves us. And because we are loved, we feel that we exist: we are 'personalized'. This is the essential thing - the actual purchase of the object is secondary. The abundance of products puts an end to scarcity; the abundance of advertising puts an end to insecurity. The worst thing possible is to be obliged to invent one's own motives for acting, for preferring, for buying. The individual in such circumstances is inevitably brought face to face with his own misapprehensions, his own lack of existence, his own bad faith and anxiety. Any object which fails to dispel such guilty feelings - which fails, as it were, to know what I want, and what I am - is liable to be dubbed bad.27 If the object loves me, then shall I be saved. Advertising (and, more broadly, public relations as a whole) relieves psychological insecurity by deploying an enormous solicitude, to which we respond by internalizing the solicitous agency - namely, that whole immense enterprise, producing not just goods but also communicational warmth, which global consumer society actually is.v- *£We should remember, too, that in a society where everything is strictly subject to the laws of selling and profit, advertising is the most democratic of products, the only one that is 'free' - and 'free' to all. Objects are always sold; only advertising 26. Riesman, The Lonely Crowd, p. 167. 27. Thus Riesman tells us of a Chicago suburb whose residents protest, not against any objective short- comings of the municipal services, but rather against the deficiencies of the psychological support offered, complaining that they have been 'so manipulated as to make them "not like it"' (ibid., p. 213). 171 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S is offered gratis.28 The mechanism of advertising thus subtly renews links with archaic rituals of giving, of offering presents, as well as with the infantile situation of a passive gratification vouchsafed by the parents. Both choice and advertising serve to transform a purely commercial relationship into a personal one.29 The Festival of Buying Power This gratificatory, infantilizing function of advertising, which is the basis of our belief in it and hence of our collusion with the social entity, is equally well illustrated by its playful aspect. We are certainly susceptible to the reassurance advertising offers by supplying an image that is never negative, but we are equally affected by advertising as a fantastic manifestation of a society capable of swamp- ing the mere necessity of products in superfluous images: advertising as a show (again, the most democratic of all), a game, a mise en scène. Advertising serves as a permanent display of the buying power, be it real or virtual, of society overall. Whether we partake of it personally QT not, we all live and breathe this buying power. By virtue of advertisirig, too, the product exposes itself to our view and invites us to handle it; it is, in fact, eroticized - not just because of the explicitly sexual themes evoked30 but also because the purchase itself, simple appropriation, is transformed into a manoeuvre, a scenario, a complicated dance which endows a purely practical transaction with all the traits of amorous dalliance: advances, rivalry, obscenity, flirtation, prostitution - even irony. The mechanics of buying (which is already libidinally charged) gives way to a complete eroticization of 28. The same goes for choice (see 'Models and Series' above): the object per se is sold to us, but the 'range' of objects on offer is 'free'. 29. That choice and advertising should be offered to us 'free' in this way results from a greater expenditure on the 'personalization' of models and on the dissemination of advertising than on basic technical research. What is given to us 'free' at the psychological level takes away from the technical qualities of what is being sold to us. The significance of this tendency can hardly be understated, and in 'developed' societies it has assumed truly vast proportions. At the same time, who is to say whether advertising, by relieving insecurity and satisfying the imagination, does not fulfil an objective function every bit as fundamental as a technical progress responding to material needs? 30. Some common leitmotivs (breasts, lips) should perhaps be deemed less erotic than 'nurturing' in character. 172 A D V E R T I S I N G choosing and spending.31 Our modern environment assails us relentlessly, especially in the cities, with its lights and its images, its incessant inducements to status-consciousness and narcissism, emotional involvement and obligatory rela- tionships. We live in a cold-blooded carnival atmosphere, a formal yet electrifying ambience of empty sensual gratification wherein the actual process of buying and consuming is demonstrated, illuminated, mimicked - even frustrated - much as the sexual act is anticipated by dance. By means of advertising, as once upon a time by means of feasts, society puts itself on display and consumes its own image. An essential regulatory function is evident here. Like the dream, advertising defines and redirects an imaginary potentiality. Like the dream's, its practical character is strictly subjective and individual.32 And, like the dream, advertising is devoid of all negativity and relativity: with never a sign too many nor a sign too few, it is essentially superlative and totally immanent in nature.33 Our night-time dreams are uncaptioned, whereas the one that we live in our waking hours via the city'sjioardings, in our newspapers and on our screens, is covered with captions, with multiple subtitling. Bcfth, however, weave the most colourful of narratives from the most impoverished of raw materials, and just as the function of nocturnal dreams is to protect sleep, so likewise the prestige of advertising and consumption serves to ensure the spontaneous absorption of ambient social values and the regression of the individual into social consensus. Festival, imntanence, positivity - to use such terms amounts to saying that in the first instance advertising is itself less a determinant of consumption than an object of consumption. What would an object be today if it weremot put on offer both in the mode of discourse and image (advertising) and in the mode of a range of models (choice)? It would be psychologically nonexistent. And what would modern citizens be if objects and products were not proposed to them in the twin dimensions 31. The literal meaning of the German word for advertising, 'die Werbung', is erotic exploration. 'Der umwor- bene Mensch', the person won over by advertising, can also mean a person who is sexually solicited. 32. Advertising campaigns designed to alter group behaviour or modify social structures (for example, those against alcohol abuse, dangerous driving, etc.) are notoriously ineffective. Advertising resists the (collective) reality principle. The only imperative that may be effective in this context is 'Give!' - for it is part of the reversible system of gratification. 33. Negative or ironic advertisements are mere antiphrasis - a well-known device, too, of the dream. 173 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S of advertising and choice? They would not be free. We can understand the reactions of the two thousand West Germans polled by the Allenbach Demoscopic Institute: 60 per cent expressed the view that there was too much advertising, yet when they were asked, 'Would you rather have too much advertising (Western style) or minimal - and only socially useful - advertising (as in the East)?', a majority favoured the first of these options, taking an excess of advertising as indicative not only of affluence but also of freedom - and hence of a basic value.34 Such is the measure of the emotional and ideological collusion that advertising's spectacular mediation creates between the individual and society (whatever the structures of the latter may be). If all advertising were abolished, individuals would feel frustrated by the empty hoardings. Frustrated not merely by the lack of opportunity (even in an ironic way) for play, for dreaming, but also, more profoundly, by the feeling that they were no longer somehow 'being taken care of. They would miss an environment thanks to which, in the absence of active social participation, they can at least partake of a travesty of the social entity and enjoy a warmer, more maternal and more vivid atmosphere! One of the first demands of man in his progression towards well-being is that his desires be attended to, that they be formulated and expressed in the form of images for his own contemplation (something which is a problem, or becomes a problem, in socialist countries). Advertising fills this function, which is futile, regressive and inessential - yet for that very reason even more profoundly necessary. Gratification/Repression: A Two-Sided Agency We need to discern the true imperative of advertising behind the gentle litany of the object: 'Look how the whole of society simply adapts itself to you and your desires. It is therefore only reasonable that you should become integrated into that society/ Persuasion is hidden, as Vance Packard says, but its aim is less the 'compulsion' to buy, or conditioning by means of objects, than the subscription 34. Naturally the existing political situation of the two Germanies must be taken into account, but there can be little doubt that the absence of advertising in the Western sense is a real contributing factor to West German prejudice against the East. 174 A D V E R T I S I N G to social consensus that this discourse urges: the object is a service, a personal relationship between society and you. Whether advertising is organized around the image of the mother or around the need to play, it always aims to foster the same tendency to regress to a point anterior to real social processes, such as work, production, the market, or value, which might disturb this magical integration: the object has not been bought by you, you have voiced a desire for it and all the engineers, technicians, and so on, have worked to gratify your desire. With the advent of industrial society the division of labour severs labour from its product. Advertising adds the finishing touch to this development by creating a radical split, at the moment of purchase, between products and consumer goods', by interpolating a vast maternal image between labour and the product of labour, it causes that product no longer to be viewed as such (complete with its history, and so on), but purely and simply as a good, as an object. And even as it separates the producer and the consumer within the one individual, thanks to the material abstraction of a highly differentiated system of objects, advertising strives inversely to re-create the infantile confusion of the object with the desire for the object, to return the consumer to the stage at which the infant makes no distinction between its mother and what its mother gives it. In reality advertising's careful omission of objective processes and the social history of objects is simply a way of making it easier, by means of the imagination as a social agency, to impose the real order of production and exploitation. This is where, behind the psychogogy of advertising, it behoves us to recognize the demagogy of a political discourse whose own tactics are founded on a splitting into two - on the splitting of social reality into a real agency and an image, with the first disappearing behind the second, becoming indecipherable and giving way to nothing more than a pattern of absorption into a maternal world. When adver- tising tells you, in effect, that 'society adapts itself totally to you, so integrate yourself totally into society', the reciprocity thus invoked is obviously fake: what adapts to you is an imaginary agency, whereas you are asked in exchange to adapt to an agency that is distinctly real. Via the armchair that 'weds the shape of your body', it is the entire technical and political order of society that weds you and takes you in hand. Society assumes a maternal role the better to preserve the rule 175 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S of constraint.35 The immense political role played by the diffusion of products and advertising techniques is here clearly evident: these mechanisms effectively replace earlier moral or political ideologies. Indeed, they go farther, for moral and political forms of integration were never unproblematical and always had to be buttressed by overt repression, whereas the new techniques manage to do without any such assistance: the consumer internalizes the agency of social control and its norms in the very process of consuming. /This effectiveness is reinforced by the status accorded the signs advertising manipulates and the process whereby these are 'read'. ! Signs in advertising speak to us of objects, but they never (or scarcely ever) explain those objects from the standpoint of a praxis: they refer to objects as to a world that is absent. These signs are literally no more than a 'legend7: they are there primarily for the purpose of being read. But while they do^not refer to the real world, neither do they exactly replace that world: their function is to impose a specific activity, a specific kind of reading. If they did carry information, then a full reading, and a transition to the practical realm, would occur. But their role is a different one: to draw attention to the absence of what they designate. To this extent the reading of such signs is intransitive - organized in terms of a specific system of satisfaction which is, however, perpetually determined by the absence of reality, that is to say, by frustration. The image creates a void, indicates an absence, and it is in this respect that it is 'evocative'. It is deceptive, however. It provokes a cathexis which it then immediately short-circuits at the level of reading. It focuses free-floating wishes upon an object which it masks as much as reveals. The image disappoints: its function is at once to display and simultaneously to disabuse. Looking is based on a presumption of contact; the image and its reading are based on a presumption of possession. Thus advertising offers neither a hallucinated satisfaction nor a practical mediation with the world. Rather, what it produces is dashed hopes: 35. What is more, behind this system of gratification we may discern the reinforcement of all the structures of authority (planning, centralization, bureaucracy). Parties, States, power structures - all are able to strengthen their hegemony under cover of this immense mother-image which renders any real challenge to them less and less possible. 176 A D V E R T I S I N G unfinished actions, continual initiatives followed by continual abandonments thereof, false dawnings of objects, false dawnings of desires. A whole psychodrama is quickly enacted when an image is read. In principle, this enables the reader to assume his passive role and be transformed into a consumer. In actuality, the sheer profusion of images works at the same time to counter any shift in the direction of reality, subtly to fuel feelings of guilt by means of continual frustration, and to arrest consciousness at the level of a phantasy of satisfaction. In the end the image and the reading of the image are by no means the shortest way to the object, merely the shortest way to another image. The signs of advertising thus follow upon one another like the transient images of hypnagogic states. We must not forget that the image serves in this way to avoid reality and create frustration, for only thus can we grasp how it is that the reality principle omitted from the image nevertheless effectively re-emerges therein as the continual repres- sion of desire (as the spectacularization, blocking and dashing of that desire and, ultimately, its regressive and visible transference onto an object). This is where the profound collusion between the advertising sign and the overall order of society becomes most evident: it is not in any mechanical sense that advertising conveys the values of society; rather, more subtly, it is in its ambiguous presumptive function -somewhere between possession and dispossession, at once a designation and an indication of absence - that the advertising sign 'inserts' the social order into its system of simultaneous determination by gratification on the one hand and repression on the other.36 Gratification, frustration - two indivisible aspects of social integrations Every advertising image is a key, a legend, and as such reduces the anxiety-provoking polysemy of the world. But in the name of intelligibility the image becomes impov- erished, cursory; inasmuch as it is still susceptible of too many interpretations, its meaning is further narrowed by the addition of discourse - of a subtitle, as it 36. This account may also be applied to the system of objects. Because the object too is ambiguous, because it is never merely an object but always at the same time an indication of the absence of a human relationship (just as the sign in advertising is an indication of the absence of a real object) - for these reasons, the object may like- wise play a powerful integrative role. It is true, however, that the object's practical specificity means that the indication of the absence of the real is less marked in the case of the object than in that of the advertising sign. 177 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S were, which constitutes a second legend. And, by virtue of the way it is read, the image always refers only to other images. In the end advertising soothes people's consciousness by means of a controlled social semantics - controlled, ultimately, to the point of focusing on a single referent, namely the whole society itself. Society thus monopolizes all the roles. It conjures up a host of images whose meanings it immediately strives to limit. It generates an anxiety that it then seeks to calm. It fulfils and disappoints, mobilizes and demobilizes. Under the banner of advertising it institutes the reign of a freedom of desire, but desire is never truly liberated thereby (which would in fact entail the end of the social order): desire is liberated by the image only to the point where its emergence triggers the associated reflexes of anxiety and guilt. Primed by the image only to be defused by it, and made to feel guilty to boot, the nascent desire is co-opted by the agency of control. There is a profusion of freedom, but this freedom is imaginary; a continual mental orgy, but one which is stage-managed, a controlled regression in which all perversity is resolved in favour of order. If gratification is massive in consumer society, repres- sion is equally massive - and both reach us together via the images and discourse of advertising, which activate the repressive reality principle at the very heart of the pleasure principle. The Presumption of Collectivity Pax Washing Powder It is not only the objective processes of production and of the market that are passed over in silence by advertising, but also real society and its contradictions. Advertising plays on the presence/absence of an overall social body - on a presumption of collectivity. The collective realm is imaginary in advertising, but its virtual consumption suffices to ensure serial conditioning. Take, for instance, a poster for Pax Washing Powder. We are shown an immense faceless crowd waving immaculate white flags (Pax whiteness) and gazing towards an idol in their midst consisting of a gigantic carton of Pax, reproduced with photographic accuracy, whose size relative to the crowd is approximately that of the United Nations building in New York. Of course a whole ideology of honesty and peace underpins 178 A D V E R T I S I N G this image, but for our present purposes the most interesting thing here is the way it makes use of a hypostasized collectivity. The individual consumer will be successfully persuaded that he personally desires Pax to the extent that his own image is reflected back to him in advance as part of a synthesis. The crowd in the advertisement is him, and his desire is evoked by the image's presumption of a collective desire. Advertising is very canny here, for every desire, no matter how intimate, still aspires to universality. Subtending a man's desire for a woman is the assumption that all men are capable of desiring her. No desire, even a sexual one, can endure without the mediation of an imagined collective realm. Perhaps, indeed, no desire can ever take form without this imaginary dimension: is it conceivable that a man could love a woman if he were certain that no other man in the world could possibly desire her? Conversely, one can easily love a woman one does not even know if she is adored by masses of people. This is the ever-present (but for the most part hidden) underpinning of advertising. It is normal that our desires as we experience them should embody a reference to the collectivity, but what advertising strives to do is to make this the inaugural dimension of desire. Far from relying on the spontaneity of individual needs, advertising prefers to control these needs by mobilizing the collective reference and having consciousness crystallize entirely upon the collective idea. There is a kind of totalitarian social dynamics here, jubilantly celebrating its finest victory - the successful prosecution of a strategy of solicitation founded on the presumption of collectivity. This promotion of desire on the sole basis of the group responds to a fundamental need, that of communication, but it does so as a way of reinforcing not genuine collectivity but merely a phantom thereof. The Pax advertisement is perfectly clear: advertising affects to unify individuals on the basis of a product whose purchase and use actually banish each individual to his own private sphere. Paradoxically we are induced, in the name of everyone and out of a reflex of solidarity, to buy an object that we immediately use to differentiate ourselves from other people. Thus nostalgia for collectivity fuels competition between individuals. In point of fact this competition is itself illusory, in that in the end each individual who first reads the poster and then buys the product is personally buying the same object as everyone else. The upshot of the transaction, its 'benefit' (to the social order), remains a regressive identification with a vague 179 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S collective totality, and hence an internalization of the sanction of the social group. As always, complicity and guilt are closely associated here: what advertising also underpins, therefore, is (virtual) guilt towards the group. But it no longer does so according to the traditional pattern of moral censure, the difference being that anxiety and guilt are now aroused in advance, ready for use as required; and in fact they will be used, with the emergence of a controlled desire, to effect submission to group norms. It may be easy enough to resist the explicit imperative of the Pax poster - to declare that it cannot make you buy Pax rather than Omo or Sunil or, for that matter, any of them; it is much harder to reject the poster's second referent, namely the vibrant and enthusiastic crowd (buttressed by the ideology of 'peace'). And the reason why we have difficulty resisting this pattern of complicity is that here resistance is not even the issue: it is true that in this particular advertisement the connotation is still easy to interpret, but group sanction need not be indicated by a crowd: any representation whatsoever will do. An erotic one, for instance. True, we do not buy potato crisps just because they are connoted by a woman with blonde hair and a sexy bottom. What is certain, though, is that the brief moment when the libido is thus mobilized by an image offers a sufficient opportunity for society as an agency of control to invade us in its entirety, complete with its customary armamentarium, namely the mechanisms of repression, sublimation and transference. Promotional Contests Every year certain newspapers feature long-running competitions that conclude with the following decisive question: 'How many correct solutions will we receive in this contest?' The function of this simple question is to reintroduce pure chance, to whose elimination the contestants have by now been applying their minds for several weeks. Any real competition is thus immediately reduced to the kind of magical choosing that characterizes lotteries. What is interesting, however, is that the chance involved here is of no ordinary kind. It is neither the God nor the fate of earlier times, but a nonce-collectivity, a contingent and arbitrary group (the sum total of people liable to enter or win the contest) which becomes the agency 180 A D V E R T I S I N G of adjudication, and it is the divining of this agency, the successful identification of an individual with this collective chance, that becomes the mark of the winner. All of which explains why the earlier questions in such competitions are generally so simple: the greatest possible number of entrants have to participate in the essen- tial moment, in the magical intuiting of the Great Collectivity (pure chance serves, in addition, to restore the myth of absolute democracy). In short, the ultimate referent of these competitions turns out to be a sort of phantom collectivity, purely conjectural in nature, non-structural, devoid of any image of itself (it is 'embodied' solely in the most abstract way, and simultaneously with its self-dissolution, in the number of correct entries received), and bound up exclusively with the gratifi- cation of the single person or very few people who have happed upon it in its very abstractness. GARAP We consume the product through the product itself, but we consume its meaning through advertising. Picture for a moment our modern cities stripped of all signs, their walls blank as an empty consciousness. And imagine that all of a sudden the single word GARAP appears everywhere, written on every wall. A pure signifier, having no referent, signifying only itself, it is read, discussed, interpreted in a vacuum, signified despite itself - in short, consumed qua sign. What indeed can it signify except for the society itself that is capable of generating such a sign? By virtue of its very lack of signification it mobilizes an entire imaginary collectivity. It comes to stand for a whole society. In a way people end up 'believing' in GARAP. They consider it the mark of advertising's omnipotence, and judge that if only GARAP would assume the specificity of a product, then that product would meet with an immediate and sweeping success. Nothing, however, could be less certain, and the cunning of the advertisers lies precisely in the fact that they never reveal this. Were a specific referent to be made explicit, individual resistance would certainly come back into play. But consent (even ironic consent) thus founded on faith in a pure sign is self-creating. Advertising's true referent is here apparent in its purest form: like GARAP, advertising is mass society itself, using systematic, 181 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S arbitrary signs to arouse emotions and mobilize consciousness, and reconstituting its collective nature in this very process.37 Advertising is a plebiscite whereby mass consumer society wages a perpetual campaign of self-endorsement.38 A New Humanism? Serial Conditioning It should now be easier to grasp the nature of the system of conditioning that is at work behind the themes of competition and 'personalization'. That same ideology of competition which formerly, under the banner of 'freedom', constituted the golden rule of production has now been transposed without restrictions into the realm of consumption. Thanks to thousands of marginal distinctions and the often purely formal diffraction of a single product by means of conditioning, competition has become more aggravated on every plane, opening up the immense range of possibilities of a precarious freedom - indeed, of the ultimate freedom, namely the freedom to choose the objects which will distinguish one from other people.39 In fact the ideology of competition is arguably bound to fall here into the toils of the same process, and hence to meet the same fate, as it did in the realm of production: although consumption may still take itself for a sort of liberal progression in which personal expression has a part to play, whereas production is 37. Every single advertising sign bears independent witness to this tautological system of recognition, because all such signs, whatever they signify, also refer to themselves as advertising. 38. Is this not somewhat reminiscent of Claude Lévi-Strauss's account of the totemic system, according to which arbitrary totemic signs are the conduit by whose means a social order makes itself apparent in its durable immanence? Viewed in this light, advertising would appear to be the end-product of a cultural sys- tem which has reverted (with its repertoire of 'brands') to the poverty of the sign codes of archaic systems. 39. The French word 'concurrence' [here rendered as 'competition' - Trans.] is ambiguous in that it means both rivalry and convergence. It is true that furious competition is a sure way to produce convergence at a single point. There is a threshold of technical progress (reached notably in the United States) beyond which all objects of a given type become interchangeable, and the differentiation requirement can then be fulfilled only to the extent that all are modified in unison, say once a year, and this in accordance with the same criteria. The extreme form of free choice similarly subjects everyone to the ritual obligation to possess the same things. 182 A D V E R T I S I N G inescapably governed by planning, this is merely because the techniques of psycho- logical conditioning are far less advanced than those of economic planning. We in Europe still want what others do not have: in the West, at any rate (the question having been deferred in the Eastern bloc), we are still at the competitive, the heroic stage in the choice and use of objects. The regular replacement and cyclical synchronization of models have not yet established themselves here as they have in the United States.40 Should we attribute this to psychological resistance, or perhaps to the strength of tradition? Probably the cause is a simpler one: the majority of Western Europe's population is still a long way from achieving the sort of economic status that makes it fundamentally possible, with all objects of consumption aligned on the same maximal standard, for a single repertoire of models to hold sway, for diversity to become in effect less important than owning the 'latest' model, which is the essential stamp of social worth. In the United States 90 per cent of the popula- tion aspire solely to the possession of what others possess, and from one year to the next they massively choose the latest model, which is in every single respect the best. A solid class of 'normal' consumers has thus been constituted which, for all practical purposes, coincides with the entire population. Although we have not yet reached that stage in Europe, we are already very well able, on account of the irreversible pressure exerted by the American model, to perceive the ambiguity of advertising: it provokes us into competing, but at the same time the imaginary competition thus set in motion already bespeaks a profound monotony, a demand for uniformity, the sinking of the consuming masses into a regressive contentment. It tells us to 'Buy this, because it is like nothing else' ('the meat of the elite', 'the cigarette of the happy few', etc.) - but it also tells us to 'Buy this because everyone else uses it!'41 Nor is there any real contradiction here. It is quite possible for each person to feel unique even though 40. In the United States, essential objects such as cars and refrigerators tend to have a predictable and obliga- tory life-span of one year (three years in the case of television sets, somewhat longer for a flat). Norms of social status end up imposing a kind of metabolism of the object, an ever-accelerating cycle. Very far removed from the cycles of nature, yet often oddly congruent with the old round of the seasons, this new kind of cycle and the necessity of complying with it are now the true basis of the American citizen's ethos. 41. This ambiguity is perfectly epitomized by advertising's use of 'you' - as in 'Guinness is Good for You'. Is this a polite (and hence personalizing) way of addressing the individual, or is the message directed at the social group as a whole? Is this 'you' (or the French vous in similar contexts) singular or plural? The answer is 183 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S everyone is alike: all that is needed is a pattern of collective and mythological projection - in other words, a model.42 We may well conclude that the destiny of consumer society (thanks not to Machiavellian technocrats but, rather, to the simple structural play of competition) is the functionalization of the consumer himself, the psychological monopolization of all needs - a unanimity in consumption which will at last harmonize with the concentration and unbridled interventionism that govern production. Freedom by Default Moreover, the ideology of competition is now giving way everywhere to a 'philosophy' of personal accomplishment. Society is better integrated, so instead of vying for possession of things, individuals seek self-fulfilment, independently of one another, through what they consume. The leitmotiv of discriminative competition has been replaced by that of personalization for all. Meanwhile, advertising has transformed itself from a commercial practice into a theory of the praxis of consumption, a theory which now crowns the whole social edifice. Expositions of this theory are to be found in the works of American advertising men (Ernest Dichter, Pierre Martineau, et alii). The thesis is simple: (1) the con- sumer society (objects, products, advertising) offers the individual the possibility, for the first time in history, of total liberation and self-realization; (2) transcending consumption pure and simple in the direction of individual and collective self- expression, the system of consumption constitutes a true language, a new culture. The 'nihilism7 of consumption is thus effectively countered by a 'new humanism' of consumption. both: the pronoun addresses each individual inasmuch as he resembles all others. Fundamentally this is the impersonal or gnomic 'you' (cf. Leo Spitzer in Sprache im technischen Zeitalter, December 1964, p. 961). 42. When Brigitte Bardot hairdos were all the rage, every girl who followed the fashion remained unique in her own eyes, because her point of reference was never the thousands of others who looked exactly like her but, rather, Bardot herself, sublime archetype and fountainhead of uniqueness. Among the mad - to carry this logic to its extreme - there is nothing especially bothersome about being one of four or five people in the asylum all of whom take themselves for Napoleon. Consciousness here is shaped not by a real relationship but by an imaginary one. 184 A D V E R T I S I N G As to the first point, the question of personal fulfilment, Ernest Dichter, director of the Institute for Motivational Research, does not hesitate to define the problematics of the 'new man' as follows: The problem confronting us now is how to allow the average American to feel moral even when he is flirting, even when he is spending money, even when he is buying a second or third car. One of the most difficult tasks created by our current affluence is sanctioning and justifying people's enjoyment of it, convincing them that to take pleasure in their lives is moral and not immoral. Permission given the consumer freely to enjoy life, and proof that he has the right to surround himself with products that enrich his existence and give him pleasure - these should be the cardinal themes of all advertising and of all attempts to promote sales.43 The manipulating of motivation thus apparently ushers in an era in which advertising will assume moral responsibility for society as a body, replacing puri- tanical morality with a hedonism founded purely on satisfaction and introducing a new state of nature, so to speak, into the bosom of hypercivilization. There is an ambivalence in Dichter's last sentence, however: is the goal of advertising to free man from his resistance to happiness, or is it to promote sales? Is society to be reorganized for the sake of satisfaction or for the sake of profits? In his preface to the French edition of Vance Packard's The Hidden Persuaders, Marcel Bleustein- Blanchet maintains that 'motivational research is no threat to individual freedom and in no way prejudices the individual's right to be rational or irrational'. But this claim is simple-minded, if not disingenuous. Dichter is more frank, and makes it clear that the freedom in question is conceded. He talks of 'giving consumers permission' - in other words, people must be allowed to be children without being ashamed of it. 'Free to be oneself really means free to project one's desires onto commodities. And Dichter's 'free to enjoy life' means free to be irrational and 43. [Tranalator's note: The author gives The Strategy of Desire as the source of this passage, but I have been unable to trace it in the original edition (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1960), so I have retranslated from the French. But see the identical arguments set forth in Dichter's book, pp. 253 ff.] 185 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S regressive - and hence adapted to a specific social organization of production.44 The 'philosophy' of selling has little use for such paradoxes, and it appeals to rational goals (enlightening people as to what they want) and to scientific methods as justifications for its attempt to provoke irrational behaviour (i.e. accepting the role of being nothing but a bundle of unmediated drives and being satisfied so long as those drives are satisfied). Even drives can be dangerous, however, and the neo-sorcerers of consumption are very careful indeed not to liberate anybody with a rousing call to happiness. Rather, they offer merely to resolve tensions - that is to say, they offer a freedom merely by default: . . . whenever a person in one socioeconomic category aspires to a different category, a 'tension differential' is developed within him and this leads to frustration and action. Where a product promises to help a group overcome this tension, achieve its level of aspiration in whatever area it may fall, that product has a chance of success.45 The aim is to allow drives hitherto inhibited by psychic agencies (taboos, superego, guilt) to crystallize upon objects, which themselves thus become capable of negating the explosive force of desire and materializing the ritual repressive function of the social order. What is dangerous is freedom of being, for it pits the individual against society. Freedom of ownership, however, is harmless, for it unknowingly serves society's purposes. Such freedom is highly moral, as Dichter points out; indeed, it is the very acme of morality, because it reconciles the consumer with himself and with the group at one and the same time. It is the perfect form of social being. Traditional morality required merely that the individual conform to the group, whereas the philosophy of advertising requires that he conform to himself, that all his personal conflicts be resolved. This is a morality that invades the individual as never before. Taboos, anxieties and neuroses, which tend to make individuals into outsiders and outlaws, are thus supposed to be removed in favour 44. Adapting a Marxian formulation from 'On the Jewish Question', we might say that the individual in consumer society is free as a consumer, but only as a consumer. The emancipation involved is a purely formal one. 45. The Strategy of Desire, p. 84. in* A D V E R T I S I N G of a reassuring regression into objects calculated to buttress the images of the Father and the Mother in every possible way. The increasingly 'free' irrationality of drives in the depths is to be accompanied by an increasingly strict control as they emerge into the light. A New Language? Let us now consider the second claim mentioned above: does the system of objects- cum-advertising really constitute a language? The whole philosophy of idealized consumption is based on the replacement of live, conflictual human relationships by a 'personalized' relationship to objects. 'Any buying process', Pierre Martineau tells us, 'is an interaction between the personality of the individual and the so-called "personality" of the product itself.'46 The pretence is that products are now so differentiated and so numerous that they have been transformed into complex beings, and that consequently the relationship involved in buying and consuming is equivalent to any human relationship.47 But this is the whole point: is there a living syntax here? Do objects inform needs and structure them in a new way? And, reciprocally, do needs inform new social structures through the mediation of objects and their production? If so, then we may speak of language in this connection; if not, then all this is nothing but the self-serving idealizations of managers. Structure and Demarcation: Brands Buying today bears no resemblance to a free or living form of exchange. It is a predetermined operation in which two strictly incompatible systems confront one another, one being the mobile, inconsistent individual, with his needs, his conflicts and his negativity; the other being the codified, classified, discontinuous and 46. Motivation in Advertising: Motives That Make People Buy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957), p. 73. 47. There are other, archaic, ways of personalizing buying: barter, the second-hand trade (which involves chance), shopping expeditions (which involve patience and an element of play), and so on. The reason I call these forms archaic is that they all assume a passive product and an active buyer. Today all the responsibility for personalization has devolved onto advertising. 187 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S relatively consistent system of products in all their positivity. There is no interaction between the two, but there is certainly a forced integration of the system of needs into the system of products. Of course, the net result does constitute a system that signifies as well as a system for procuring satisfaction. But for there to be 'language' there has to be syntax, and in the case of objects of mass consumption all we have is an inventory. Let me try to explain in more detail. At the stage of craft production, objects reflected the contingency, the uniqueness, of needs. The two systems were adapted to one another, yet their combination lacked coherence - indeed, the only coherence was the relative one of needs, which were mobile and contingent: objective techno- logical progress did not exist. With the advent of the industrial era, manufactured products acquired a new coherence, one bestowed on them by the organization of technology and economic structures, while the system of needs now became less consistent than the system of objects. The latter, by imposing this new coherence, was able to mould a civilization.48 At the same time, as Lewis Mumford notes, 'the machine has replaced an unlimited series of variables' - i.e. objects 'made to measure', adapted to specific needs - 'with a limited number of constraints'.49 This development does undoubtedly lay the foundations for a new language: internal structuring, simplification, transitions to the bounded and the discontinuous, the constitution of technemes and their growing convergence. And if craft objects may be said to be on a par with words or speech [parole], it must be acknowledged that industrial technology institutes a linguistic system [langue]. But a linguistic system is not language in the full sense [langage]:50 it is not the material structure of the motorcar that gives that car its voice, but the form, colour, contours, accessories or 'social standing' of the car as an object. And what we have here is a Tower of Babel, for each speaks in its own idiom. Even so, serial production contrives, by means 48. See Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques (Paris: Aubier, 1958), p. 24. 49. Technics and Civilization (see above, p. 57, note 37), pp. 277-8. 50. [Translator's note: No convention having been established on the English rendering of the terms parole, langue and langage, they are given here in square brackets in the hope that this may assist readers interested in the way the author uses these notoriously slippery Saussurean concepts. See also above, p. 11, note 7.] 188 A D V E R T I S I N G of its calibrated differences and combinatorial variations, to carve out meanings, to generate a repertoire or lexicon of forms and colours via which recurrent modalities of 'speech' can be expressed. But does this amount to a language? No, because this vast paradigm lacks any true syntax. It lacks the rigorous syntax of technology and it lacks the loose syntax of needs, and it wafts back and forth between the two, a sort of two-dimensional repertoire which tends to exhaust its possibilities on the day- to-day level in an immense combinatorial grid of types and models where needs, in their incoherence, are effectively assigned places, but no reciprocal structuring occurs as a result; inasmuch as products are better integrated, it is needs that flow towards them and manage - by cutting themselves into pieces, by becoming discontinuous - to insert themselves, with difficulty and in arbitrary fashion, into the grid of objects. The fact is that the system of individual needs swamps the world of objects with its utter contingency, yet this contingency is somehow inventoried, classified and demarcated by objects: it thus becomes possible to control it - and this, from the socio-economic point of view, is the system's real goal. If the industrial organization of technology acquires the power to mould our civilization, it does so, then, in a dual and contradictory way: by virtue of its coherence but also by virtue of its incoherence. By virtue, at a 'high level', of its struc- tural (technological) coherence, but also, 'at the base', by virtue of the astructural (but controlled) incoherence of the mechanics of the commercialization of products and the satisfaction of needs. It is clear, therefore, that whereas language, because it is neither consumed nor owned in any true sense by those who speak it, always retains the possibility of access to the 'essential', to a syntax of exchange (structured communication), the system of objects-cum-advertising, for its part, overwhelmed by the inessential, by a destructured universe of needs, can satisfy such needs only in piecemeal fashion and can never found new structures of social exchange. Here, once again, is Pierre Martineau: There is no simple relationship between kinds of buyers and kinds of cars, how- ever. Any human is a complex of many motives... [whose] meanings may vary in countless combinations. Nevertheless the different makes and models are seen as helping people give expression to their own personality dimensions. 189 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S And Martineau offers several examples of such 'personalization': The conservative in car choice and behavior wishes to convey such ideas as dignity, reserve, maturity, seriousness.. . . Another definite series of car personalities is selected by the people wanting to make known their middle- of-the-road moderation, their being fashionable.. . . Further along the range of personalities are the innovators and ultramoderns. . . .51 No doubt Martineau is right: this is indeed how people define themselves by means of their objects. What is also clear, though, is that those objects do not constitute a real language, but merely a range of distinguishing marks more or less arbitrarily keyed to a range of stereotyped personalities. Everything suggests that the differentiating system of consumption is a powerful tool for demarcating (1) categories of needs within the consumer himself which now have but the remotest of relationships with the person as a living whole; and (2) categories - or 'status groups' - within society overall which can be identified by means of some particu- lar set of objects. Hierarchies of products and objects thus come to play precisely the same role as that formerly played by a range of distinct values: they become the basis, in short, of the group's ethos. Both the aforementioned functions entail the solicitation, impressment and classification of the personal and social world - a compulsion, exerted through objects, towards integration into a hierarchical repertoire with no syntax, that is to say, into a system of categories that is distinctly not a language. It is as though there were, not a social dialectic, but a social process of demarcation by whose means an order is imposed, an order which in turn dictates a sort of objective fate (materialized in objects) for each subgroup: in short, a set of pigeonholes within which relationships can only become more impoverished. Our enthusiastic and devious philosophers of 'motivation' would love to convince themselves, as well as everyone else, that the reign of objects is still the shortest road to freedom. As evidence of this they need this spectacular muddle of needs and satisfactions, this profusion of choices - this whole carnival of supply and demand - whose sheer 51. Motivation in Advertising, p. 75. 190 A D V E R T I S I N G effervescence creates the illusion of a culture. But let there be no mistake: objects work as categories of objects which, in the most tyrannical fashion, define categories of people - they police social meaning, and the significations they engender are rigidly controlled. In their proliferation, at once arbitrary and coherent, objects are the best possible vector of a social order that is equally arbitrary and equally coherent, and, under the banner of affluence, they indeed become a most effective material expression of that order. The concept of 'brand', which is advertising's prime concept, sums up the prospects for a 'language' of consumption rather well. All products (with the excep- tion of perishable foodstuffs) are now offered under brand names. Every product 'worthy of the name' has a brand which may sometimes even become a generic term (e.g. 'frigidaire'). The brand's primary function is to designate a product; its secondary function is to mobilize emotional connotations: Actually, in our highly competitive system, few products are able to maintain any technical superiority for long. They must be invested with overtones to individualize them; they must be endowed with richness of associations and imagery; they must have many levels of meaning, if we expect them to be top sellers, if we hope that they will achieve the emotional attachment which shows up as brand loyalty.52 The psychological restructuring of the consumer may thus turn on a single word - PHILIPS, OLID A or GENERAL MOTORS - capable of connoting at once a diversity of objects and a mass of diffuse meanings: a synthetic word covering a synthesis of emotions. Such is the miracle of Martineau's 'psychological label'. And this is the only language, ultimately, in which the object speaks to us - the only language that it has invented. Yet the basic lexicon that covers our walls and haunts our consciousness remains strictly asyntactic: different brands succeed one another, are juxtaposed, or replace one another, without articulation or transition; this is an erratic lexical system in which brands devour one another and the lifeblood of each brand is interminable repetition. There can be no more impoverished 52. Ibid., p. 50. 191 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S language than this one, laden with referents yet empty of meaning as it is. It is a language of mere signals, and 'brand loyalty' can never, therefore, be more than a conditioned reflex of manipulated emotions. The philosophers of advertising will doubtless object that the satisfaction of 'deep motives' can only be a good thing (even if these motives are then integrated into an impoverished system of labels). 'Free yourselves from your inner censor!', they are liable to cry. 'Outsmart your superego!' 'Have the courage of your desires!' But the question is: are these deep motives really being called up so that they may be articulated as a language? Can a system of reference such as this really invest hitherto hidden areas of the personality with meaning - and, if so, with what meaning? To quote Martineau one last time: Naturally it is better to use acceptable, stereotyped terms.... This is the very essence of metaphor.... If I ask for a 'mild' cigarette or a 'beautiful' car, while I can't define these attributes literally, I still know that they indicate some- thing desirable.... The average motorist isn't sure at all what 'octane' in gasoline actually i s . . . . But he does know vaguely that it is something good. So he orders 'high-octane' gasoline, because he desires this essence quality behind the meaningless surface jargon.53 In other words, no sooner has the discourse of advertising awakened desire than it subjects it to generalization of the vaguest kind. Reduced to their simplest expression, the deep motives are keyed to a ready-instituted code of connotations, and 'choice', fundamentally, can only seal the collusion between this moral order and the individual's deepest wishes. Such is the alchemy of the 'psychological label'.54 53. Ibid., p. 100. 54. Comparing advertising to a kind of magic is really giving it too much credit, however. The nominalist lexicon of the alchemists has something of a genuine language about it, structured as it is by a praxis of research and interpretation. By contrast, the nominalism of 'brands' is strictly immanent - and congealed by economic imperatives. 192 A D V E R T I S I N G In actuality, this stereotyped calling-forth of deep motives is nothing but a form of censorship. The ideology of personal fulfilment and the triumphant illogicality of drives supposedly freed from guilt are in fact merely a tremendous effort to materialize the superego. What is 'personalized' in the object is primarily censorship. No matter how much the philosophers of consumption may revel in the notion of deep motives as potentials for immediate happiness which have merely to be freed, the fact remains that the unconscious is conflicted, and inasmuch as advertising mobilizes it, it mobilizes it as conflict. Advertising does not liberate drives; first and foremost it liberates phantasies that serve to inhibit those drives. Hence the ambiguity of the object, in which the individual finds no route to self- transcendence, but merely an ambiguous retreat simultaneously to his desires and to the forces that censor those desires. We thus once more encounter the over- all pattern of gratification/frustration described above: with its purely formal reduction of tensions and its ever-vain regressions, what the object invariably ensures is a perpetual renewal of conflicts. Here, perhaps, is a definition of the form of alienation particular to our time: our internal conflicts or 'deep tendencies' are mobilized and alienated in the process of consumption, in exactly the same way as labour-power is alienated in the process of production. Nothing has really changed - it is just that strictures on self-fulfilment are here no longer imposed by means of oppressive laws or norms of obedience; repression is ensured instead through 'free' actions (buying, choosing, consuming), through spontaneous cathexes, through a sort of internalization operating within gratifi- cation itself. A Universal Code: Status The objects-cum-advertising system therefore constitutes less a language, whose living syntax it lacks, than a set of significations. Impoverished yet efficient, it is basically a code. It does not structure the personality, but designates and classifies it. It does not structure social relationships, but breaks them down into a hierar- chical repertoire. In its formal expression it constitutes a universal system for the identification of social rank: the code of 'status'. 193 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S In the context of 'consumer society', the notion of rank as a yardstick of social being tends to assume the simplified form of 'status'. Status in this sense is still measured in terms of power, authority and responsibility, yet fundamentally the message now is 'There is no responsibility without a Lip watch!' Advertising always refers explicitly to the object as to the essential criterion: 'You will be judged by such and such', 'The elegant woman is recognizable by such and such', and so on. No doubt objects have always played an identifying role of this kind, but formerly they did so in parallel - and this often in a purely auxiliary way - with other systems: gestural, ritual or ceremonial systems, language, rank at birth, codes of moral values, etc. The peculiarity of our own society is that all such other means of gauging rank are gradually giving way to the code of 'status'. Naturally this code applies in varying degrees according to socio- economic level, but the social function of advertising is to bring everyone under its sway. It is a moral code, for it is sanctioned by the group, and any infraction of it entails the apportionment of some measure of guilt. It is a totalitarian code, for no one escapes it; escaping it in a private sense cannot prevent us from participating every day in its collective development. Not believing in it still means believing sufficiently in other people's belief in it to adopt a sceptical stance. Even actions intended as resistance to it must be defined in terms of a society that conforms to it. / Nor is this code without its positive aspects. In the first place, it is no more arbitrary than any other code. After all, even in our own eyes, value resides in the car that we change every year, in the part of town where we live, and in the multitude of objects with which we surround ourselves and which distinguish us from other people. True, that is not the whole story, but have not codes of value always been partial and arbitrary (and moral codes more than any)? Secondly, the code of 'status' does constitute a socialization, and a total secularization, of distinguishing signs, and consequently contributes to the emanci- pation - at least in the formal sense - of social relations. Not only do objects make material life more tolerable by proliferating as commodities, they likewise make the relative standing of people more tolerable by gaining general acceptance as identifying signs. One thing may be said in favour of the 'status' system: it has the 194 A D V E R T I S I N G virtue of rendering obsolete all the old rituals of caste or class, along - in a general way - with all preceding (and preclusive) criteria of social discrimination. Thirdly, this code offers a universal system of decipherable signs for the first time in history. Perhaps it is to be regretted that it is usurping the place of all other codes, but it is arguable, conversely, that the gradual exhaustion of other systems (birth, class, function), the widening of competition, a greater social mobility, the accelerating fissiparity of social groups and the growing instability and proliferation of languages all created the necessity for a code which, by virtue of its straightforward universality, could guarantee clear and unencumbered communication. In a world where millions of men and women pass one another every day without being acquainted, the code of 'status' fulfils an essential social function by addressing people's vital need for knowledge of others. The fact is, however, that this universalization and this effectiveness are achieved only at the cost of a radical simplification, an impoverishment and a well-nigh definitive regression of the 'language' of value: 'Individuals define themselves through their objects.' Coherence is achieved through the institution of a combinatorial system or repertoire - a language that is functional, certainly, but symbolically and structurally immiserated. What is more, the fact that a system of identification is now in place which is clearly legible to all, that the signs of value are entirely socialized and objectivized, by no means implies any true 'democratization'. On the contrary, it would appear that the insistence on univocal reference merely exacerbates the desire to discriminate-. within the very framework of this homogeneous system, a perpetually renewed obsession with hierarchies and distinctions is to be observed. Even though barriers of morality, social convention and language have been overturned, new barriers and exclusions have arisen in the realm of objects: a new class or caste morality is thus enabled to colonize the most material and hitherto unchallengeable of spheres. So, while the code of 'status' is at present coming to constitute a universal apparatus of signification that is immediately readable, facilitating the free flow of social representations from one end of society to the other, this does not mean that society is becoming more transparent. The code produces an illusion of 195 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S transparency, an illusion of readable social relations, behind which the real structure of production and real social relationships remain illegible. A society would be transparent only if knowledge of the apparatus of signification was simultaneously knowledge of social structures and social realities. This is not so in the case of the objects-cum-advertising system, which offers nothing but a code of meaning that is always complicitous and always opaque. What is more, though it may provide a formal security thanks to its coherence, this code is also the best means for the global social order to extend its immanent and permanent rule to all individuals. 196 C O N C L U S I O N : T O W A R D S A D E F I N I T I O N O F ' C O N S U M P T I O N ' I should like to conclude this discussion of the various levels of the relationship to objects as an operative system with some attempt to define 'consumption'. It is to consumption, after all, that all aspects of practice in this area tend at present to lead. Just so long as it is freed once and for all from its current meaning, that of a mechanism for satisfying needs, consumption may indeed be deemed a defining mode of our industrial civilization. For consumption is surely not that passive process of absorption and appropriation which is contrasted to the supposedly active mode of production, thus counterposing two oversimplified patterns of behaviour (and of alienation). It has to be made clear from the outset that consumption is an active form of relationship (not only to objects, but also to society and to the world), a mode of systematic activity and global response which founds our entire cultural system. It has to be made clear that objects and material goods are not in fact the object of consumption - they are the object merely of needs and of the satisfaction of needs. From time immemorial people have bought, possessed, enjoyed and spent, but this does not mean that they were 'consuming'. The festivals of 'primitive' peoples, the largesse of the feudal lord, the luxury of the nineteenth-century bourgeois - none of these amounted to consumption. And if we are justified in using this term to describe present-day society, it is not because we now eat more or better, not because we absorb more images and messages, and not because we have more appliances and gadgets at our disposal. Neither the volume of goods nor the 199 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S satisfaction of needs serves properly to define the notion of consumption, for these are simply the preconditions of consumption. Consumption is not a material practice, nor is it a phenomenology of 'affluence'. It is not defined by the nourishment we take in, nor by the clothes we clothe ourselves with, nor by the car we use, nor by the oral and visual matter of the images and messages we receive. It is defined, rather, by the organization of all these things into a signifying fabric: consumption is the virtual totality of all objects and messages ready-constituted as a more or less coherent discourse. If it has any meaning at all, consumption means an activity consisting of the systematic manipulation of signs. Traditional symbolic objects (tools, furniture, the house itself) were the mediators of a real relationship or a directly experienced situation, and their sub- stance and form bore the clear imprint of the conscious or unconscious dynamic of that relationship. They were thus not arbitrary. Although they were bound by connotations - pregnant, freighted with connotations - they remained living objects on account of their inward and transitive orientation with respect to human actions, whether collective or individual. Such objects are not consumed. To become an object of consumption, an object must first become a sign. That is to say: it must become external, in a sense, to a relationship that it now merely signifies. It is thus arbitrary - and not inconsistent with that concrete relationship: it derives its consistency, and hence its meaning, from an abstract and systematic relationship to all other sign-objects. Only in this context can it be 'personalized', can it become part of a series, and so on; only thus can it be consumed, never in its materiality, but in its difference. This conversion of the object to the systematic status of a sign implies the simultaneous transformation of the human relationship into a relationship of consumption - of consuming and being consumed. In and through objects this relationship is at once consummated and abolished;1 the object becomes its inescapable mediation - and, before long, the sign that replaces it altogether. 1. [Translator's note: The author here and in the ensuing discussion exploits the fact that French has only one word (consommer) for both 'consume' and 'consummate'. I have therefore been obliged to use the two English words, or to paraphrase, in order to retain all the resonances of the text.] 200 C O N C L U S I O N So what is consummated and consumed is never the object but the relation- ship itself, signified yet absent, simultaneously included and excluded; it is the idea of the relationship that is consumed in the series of objects that displays it. The relationship is no longer directly experienced: it has become abstract, been abolished, been transformed into a sign-object, and thus consumed. This status of the relationship/object is governed at every level by the impera- tives of production. The whole apparatus of advertising suggests that the living relationship, with its contradictions, must not be allowed to disturb the 'rational' order of production, and that it should be consumed like everything else. It must be 'personalized' so that it can be incorporated into the system. Here we rediscover, in its most extreme expression, the formal logic of the commodity as analysed by Marx: just as needs, feelings, culture, knowledge - in short, all the properly human faculties - are integrated as commodities into the order of production, and take on material form as productive forces so that they can be sold, so likewise all desires, projects and demands, all passions and all relationships, are now abstracted (or materialized) as signs and as objects to be bought and consumed. Take the couple, for example, whose objective raison d'être is now the consumption of objects - including the objects that formerly symbolized the relationship.2 The beginning of Georges Perec's novel Les choses is instructive in this context: The eye, at first, would glide over the gray rug of a long corridor, high and narrow. The wall would be cabinets, whose copper fittings would gleam. Three engravings . . . would lead to a leather curtain, hanging from large rings of black-veined wood, that a simple gesture would suffice to slide back.... It would be a living room, about twenty-one feet long and nine feet wide. On the left, in a sort of alcove, a large couch of worn black leather would be flanked by two book cases in pale wild-cherry wood, on which books would be piled helter-skelter. Above the divan a nautical chart would run the whole length of the wall panel. Beyond a little low table, under a silk prayer rug attached to the wall with three copper nails with large heads, and balancing 2. Jn the United States married couples have even been encouraged to get new wedding rings every year, and to make their relationship 'meaningful' by buying gifts 'together'. 201 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S the leather hanging, another divan, perpendicular to the first, upholstered in light brown velvet, would lead to a small piece of furniture on high legs, lacquered in dark red, with three shelves that would hold bric-à-brac; agates and stone eggs, snuffboxes, jade ashtrays. .. . Farther on . . . small boxes and records, next to a closed phonograph of which only four machine-turned steel knobs would be visible... .3 Despite the thick mellow nostalgia that envelops this 'interior', it is clear that nothing in it has the slightest symbolic value any longer. One need only compare this description with any description of an interior by Balzac to see that no human relationship has left its imprint on these things: everything in Perec's décor is a sign, and purely a sign. Nothing has presence, nothing has a history - even though everything is laden with references: Oriental, Scottish, Early American, etc. The only thing all these objects have is their uniqueness: they are abstract in their difference, which is their mode of referentiality, and enter into combination with one another precisely by virtue of that abstractness. We are indubitably in the realm of consumption.4 As Perec's novel continues, we get a sense of how a system of sign-objects of this kind functions: far from symbolizing the relationship, what these objects actually describe, from the externality of their continual 'referring', is the relation- ship's emptiness, which is discernible at every moment in the lack of existence that each of the partners has for the other. Jerome and Sylvie do not exist as a couple: their sole reality is as 'Jerome-and-Sylvie' - as a pure complicity surfacing within the system of objects that signifies it. Nor can it be said that objects are an automatic substitute for the relationship that is lacking, that they serve to fill a void: on the contrary, they describe this void, the locus of the relationship, pursuant to a process which is a way of not living the relationship while at the 3. Georges Perec, Les choses, une histoire des années soixante (Paris: Julliard, 1965), p. 12 [English translation by Helen R. Lane: Things: A Story of the Sixties (New York: Grove Press, 1967), pp. 11-12]. 4. In the Perec 'interior' we are dealing with objects made transcendent by fashion, not with the 'serial' objects of mass production. Total cultural constraint - cultural terrorism - reigns here. But this makes no difference to the system of consumption itself. 202 C O N C L U S I O N same time (save in cases of complete regression) exposing it to the light of the possibility of its being lived. Thus the relationship is not sucked into the absolute positivity of objects but articulated with those objects as with so many solid points in a chain of signifiers - except that here the signifying configuration of objects is usually impoverished, schematic and closed, and deals only with the idea of a relationship, not with a relationship that can be lived. Leather couch, phonograph, bric-à-brac, jade ashtrays: it is the idea of the relationship that is signified in these objects, that is 'consumed' in them and hence abolished as anything to be directly experienced. This implies that consumption may be defined as a total idealist practice of a systematic kind which goes way beyond relations to objects and interpersonal rela- tions and extends to every level of history, communication and culture. Thus the demand for culture is a living demand, but it is only the idea of the collector's edition or the colour lithograph in the dining-room that is actually consumed. The demand for revolution is likewise a living demand, but so long as it is not actualized in practice it will be consumed as the idea of Revolution. As an idea the Revolution is indeed eternal, and must needs remain eternally consumable just like any other idea - all ideas, even the most contradictory, being capable of coexistence as signs in the idealist logic of consumption. The Revolution is therefore signified by a combinatorial terminology, a vocabulary of unmediated terms, in which it appears as already realized - and by which it is indeed 'consumed'.5 Similarly, objects of consumption constitute an idealist lexicon of signs wherein the will to live itself is discernible in an ever-receding materiality. Once again Perec's book makes the point: It sometimes seemed to them that a whole life could go harmoniously by between these book-lined walls, among these objects so perfectly domesti- cated that the two of them would end up believing that they had been forever 5. Consumed, that is, and at the same time consummated - hence also destroyed. To say that the revolution is consumed /consummated in the idea of the Revolution means that the revolution is both fulfilled (formally) and abolished in that idea; and what is presented as already realized is thenceforward consumable in an unmediated manner. [Translator's note: On 'consume'/'consummate', see note 1 above.] 203 T H E S Y S T E M O F O B J E C T S created for their own use alone. . . . But they would not feel themselves tied down by them; on certain days they would go looking for adventure. Nothing they planned would be impossible.6 But note the conditional in this last sentence - and indeed, the novel goes on to give this prediction the lie: there are no more projects - only objects. Not that the project has disappeared, exactly: it is just that its 'realization' as a sign embodied in the object is taken as satisfaction enough. The object of consumption is thus the precise form of the project's self-renunciation. This explains why THERE ARE N O LIMITS TO CONSUMPTION. If consumption were indeed what it is naively assumed to be, namely a process of absorption or devouring, a saturation point would inevitably be reached. If consumption were indeed tied to the realm of needs, some sort of progress towards satisfaction would presumably occur. We know very well, however, that nothing of the kind happens: people simply want to consume more and more. This compulsion is attributable neither to some psychological determinism ('once a drunk always a drunk', and so forth) nor to the pressure of some simple desire for prestige. That consumption seems irrepressible is due, rather, to the fact that it is indeed a total idealist practice which no longer has anything to do (beyond a certain threshold) either with the satisfaction of needs or with the reality principle. Its dynamism derives from the ever-disappointed project now implicit in objects. Thus embedded in unmediated form in the object, the project transfers its existential dynamic to the systematic and limitless acquisition of consumption's sign-objects. This means that consumption must henceforward either keep surpassing itself or keep repeating itself merely in order to remain what it is - namely, a reason for living. The very will to live, fragmented, disappointed, signified, is condemned to repeat itself and repeatedly abolish itself in a succession of objects. In this context all attempts to 'moderate' consumption or to devise a grid of needs capable of normalizing it attest to nothing but a naïve or grotesque moralism. 6. Les choses, French edition, p. 15 [English trans., pp. 15-16]. 204 C O N C L U S I O N The systematic and limitless process of consumption arises from the dis- appointed demand for totality that underlies the project of life. In their ideality sign-objects are all equivalent and may multiply infinitely; indeed, they must multiply in order at every moment to make up for a reality that is absent. Consumption is irrepressible, in the last reckoning, because it is founded upon a lack. 205  PART I T HE FORMAL LIT URGY OF T HE OBJECT 1 Profusion There is all around us today a kind of fantastic conspicuousness of con sumption and abundance, constituted by the multiplication of objects, services and material goods, and this represents something of a funda mental mutation in the ecology of the human species. Strictly speaking, the humans of the age of affluence are surrounded not so much by other human beings, as they were in all previous ages, but by objects. Their daily dealings are now not so much with their fellow men, but rather on a rising statistical curve - with the reception and manipulation of goods and messages. This runs from the very complex organization of the household, with its dozens of technical slaves, to street furniture and the whole material machinery of communication; from professional activities to the permanent spectacle of the celebration of the object in advertising and the hundreds of daily messages from the mass media; from the minor proliferation of vaguely obsessional gadgetry to the symbolic psychodramas fuelled by the nocturnal objects which come to haunt us even in our dreams. The two concepts 'environment' and 'ambience' have doubtless only enjoyed such a vogue since we have come to live not so much alongside other human beings - in their physical presence and the presence of their speech - as beneath the mute gaze of mesmerizing, obedient objects which endlessly repeat the same refrain: that of our dumbfounded power, our virtual affluence, our absence one from another. Just as the wolf-child became a wolf by living among wolves, so we too are slowly becoming functional. We live by object time: by this I mean that we live at the pace of objects, live to the rhythm of their ceaseless succession. Today, it is we who watch them as they are born, grow to maturity and die, whereas in all previous civilizations it was timeless objects, instruments or monuments which outlived the generations of human beings. Objects are neither a flora nor a fauna. And yet they do indeed give the impression of a proliferating vegetation, a jungle in which the new wild man of modern times has difficulty recovering the reflexes of civilization. 26 The formal liturgy of the object We have to attempt rapidly to describe this fauna and flora, which man has produced and which comes back to encircle and invade him as it might in a bad science fiction novel. We have to describe these things as we see and experience them, never forgetting, in their splendour and profusion, that they are the product of a human activity and are dominated not by natural ecological laws, but by the law of exchange-value. The busiest streets of London are crowded with shops whose show cases display all the riches of the world, Indian shawls, American revolvers, Chinese porcelain, Parisian corsets, furs from Russia and spices from the tropics, but all of these worldly things bear odious, white paper labels with Arabic numerals and the laconic symbols f.s.d. This is how commodities are presented in circulation. (Marx)l Profusion and the Package Profusion, piling high are clearly the most striking descriptive features. The big department stores, with their abundance of canned foods and clothing, of foodstuffs and ready-made garments, are like the primal landscape, the geometrical locus of abundance. But every street, with its cluttered, glittering shop-windows (the least scarce commodity here being light, without which the merchandise would be merely what it is), their displays of cooked meats, and indeed the entire alimentary and vestimentary feast, all stimulate magical salivation. There is something more in this piling high than the quantity of products: the manifest presence of surplus, the magical, definitive negation of scarcity, the maternal, luxurious sense of being already in the Land of Cockaigne. Our markets, major shopping thoroughfares and superstores also mimic a new-found nature of prodigious fecundity. These are our Valleys of Canaan where, in place of milk and honey, streams of neon flow down over ketchup and plastic. But no matter! We find here the fervid hope that there should be not enough, but too much - and too much for everyone: by buying a piece of this land, you acquire the crumbling pyramid of oysters, meats, pears or tinned asparagus. You buy the part for the whole. And this metonymic, repetitive discourse of consumable matter, of the commodity, becomes once again, through a great collective metaphor - by virtue of its very excess - the image of the gift, and of that inexhaustible and spectacular prodigality which characterizes the feast. Beyond stacking, which is the most rudimentary yet cogent form of abundance, objects are organized in packages or collections. Almost all the shops selling clothing or household appliances offer a range of differentiated objects, evoking, echoing and offsetting one another. The antique dealer 's window provides the aristocratic, luxury version of these sets of objects, which evoke not so much a superabundance of substance as a gamut of select and complementary objects presented for the consumer to choose among, but presented also to create in him a psychological chain reaction, as he peruses them, inventories them and Profusion 27 grasps them as a total category. Few objects today are offered alone, without a context of objects which 'speaks' them. And this changes the consumer's relation to the object: he no longer relates to a particular object in its specific utility, but to a set of objects in its total signification. Washing machine, refrigerator and dishwasher taken together have a different meaning from the one each has individually as an appliance. The shop-window, the advertisement, the manufacturer and the brand name, which here plays a crucial role, impose a coherent, collective vision, as though they were an almost indissociable totality, a series. This is, then, no longer a sequence of mere objects, but a chain of signifiers, in so far as all of these signify one another reciprocally as part of a more complex super-object, drawing the consumer into a series of more complex motivations. It is evident that objects are never offered for consumption in absolute disorder. They may, in certain cases, imitate disorder the better to seduce, but they are always arranged to mark out directive paths, to orientate the purchasing impulse towards networks of objects in order to captivate that impulse and bring it, in keeping with its own logic, to the highest degree of commitment, to the limits of its economic potential. Clothing, machines and toiletries thus constitute object pathways, which establish inertial constraints in the consumer: he will move logically from one object to another. He will be caught up in a calculus of objects, and this is something quite different from the frenzy of buying and acquisitiveness to which the simple profusion of commod ities gives rise. The Drugstore The synthesis of profusion and calculation is the drugstore. The drug store (or the new shopping centre) achieves a synthesis of consumer activities, not the least of which are shopping, flirting with objects, playful wandering and all the permutational possibilities of these. In this respect, the drugstore is more representative of modern consumption than the department stores. There, the quantitative centralization of the products leaves less margin for ludic exploration, the arrangement of departments and products imposing a more utilitarian path on the con sumer. And, generally, the large stores retain something of the period in which they emerged, when broad classes of the population were first gaining access to everyday consumer goods. There is a quite different meaning to the drugstore: it does not juxtapose categories of mer chandise, but lumps signs together indiscriminately, lumps together all categories of commodities, which are regarded as partial fields of a sign consuming totality. In the drugstore, the cultural centre becomes part of the shopping centre. It would be simplistic to say that culture is 'prostituted' there. It is culturalized. Simultaneously, commodities (cloth ing, groceries, catering etc.) are also culturalized in their turn, since they 28 The formal liturgy of the object are transformed into the substance of play and distinction, into luxury accessories, into one element among others in the general package of consumables. A new art of living, a new way of living, say the adverts - a 'switched-on' daily experience. You can shop pleasantly in a single air-conditioned location, buy your food there, purchase things for your flat or country cottage - clothing, flowers, the latest novel or the latest gadget. And you can do all this in a single trip, while husband and children watch a film, and then all dine together right there. There's a cafe, a cinema, a bookshop, places to buy trinkets, clothing and lots more in the shopping centres: the drugstore takes in everything in kaleidoscopic mode. If the department store offers the fairground spec tacle of commodities, the drugstore presents the subtle recital of con sumption, the whole 'art' of which consists in playing on the ambiguity of the sign in objects, and sublimating their status as things of use and as commodities in a play upon 'ambience'. This is generalized neo-culture, where there is no longer any difference between a delicatessen and an art gallery, between Playboy and a treatise on palaeontology. And the drug store is to modernize itself to the point of introducing 'grey matter ': Just selling products doesn't interest us. We want to put a bit of grey matter in there too . . . Three levels. A bar, a dancefloor and sales outlets. Knick-knacks, records, paperback books, intellectual books, a bit of everything. But we aren't trying to flatter the clientele. We are really offering them 'something'. A language laboratory operates on the second level. Among the records and books, you can find the major movements which are stirring our society. Experimental music, tomes which explain our times. This is the 'grey matter' that goes with the products we sell. It's a drugstore, then, but a new-style drugstore with something extra - a little intelligence, perhaps, and a bit of human warmth. The drugstore can become a whole town: this is the case with Parly 2 with its giant shopping centre in which 'art and leisure mingle with everyday life' and each group of residences radiates out from its swimming-pool, where the local clubhouse becomes its focus. A church built 'in the round', tennis courts ('the least we could do'), elegant boutiques and a library. The tiniest ski resort borrows this 'universalist' model of the drugstore: all activities there are encapsulated in, system atically combined around and centred on the basic concept of 'ambience'. Thus Flaine-la-Prodigue offers you a complete, all-purpose, combinator ial existence: Our Mont Blanc, our spruce forests; our Olympic runs, our children's 'plateau'; our architecture carved, chiselled and polished like a work of art; the purity of the air we breathe; the refined ambience of our Forum (modelled on the forums of Mediterranean towns. A lively time is to be had there after a day on the slopes. Cafes, restaurants, shops, skating-rinks, a night club, a cinema and a cultural and amusement centre are all located in the Forum to make the life you live off-piste particularly rich and varied); our internal TV system; our world-scale future (we shall soon be listed as a cultural monument by the Arts Ministry).2 Profusion 29 We are at the point where consumption is laying hold of the whole of life, where all activities are sequenced in the same combinatorial mode, where the course of satisfaction is outlined in advance, hour by hour, where the 'environment' is total - fully air-conditioned, organized, culturalized. In the phenomenology of consumption, this general 'air-conditioning' of life, goods, objects, services, behaviour and social relations represents the perfected, 'consummated' [consomme] stage of an evolution which runs from affluence pure and simple, through inter connected networks of objects, to the total conditioning of action and time, and finally to the systematic atmospherics built into those cities of the future that are our drugstores, Parly 2s and modern airports. Parly 2 'The biggest shopping centre in Europe: 'Printemps, BHV, Dior, Prisunic, Lanvin, Franck et Fils, Hediard, two cinemas, a drugstore, a Suma supermarket, a hundred other shops - all in a single location!' In the choice of shops, from grocery to high fashion, two imperatives: commercial dynamism and aesthetic sense. The famous slogan, 'Ugliness doesn't sell', is now passe. It might be replaced by: 'The beauty of the setting is the prime requirement for happy living: A two-storey structure organized around a central mall, which is the split level main thoroughfare - the triumphal avenue. Small- and large-scale traders reconciled. The modern pace of life reconciled with age-old idle wandering. The unprecedented comfort of strolling among shops whose tempting wares are openly displayed on the mall, without even a shop-window for a screen, the mall itself being a combination of the rue de la Paix and the Champs Elysees. Adorned with fountains, artificial trees, pavilions and benches, it is wholly exempt from changes of season or bad weather: an exceptional system of climate control, requiring 13 kilometres of air-conditioning ducts, makes for perpetual springtime. Not only can you buy anything here, from shoelaces to an airline ticket; not only can you find insurance companies and cinemas, banks or medical services, bridge clubs and art exhibitions, but you are not a slave to the clock. The mall, like any street, is accessible night and day, seven days a week. Naturally, for those who want it, the centre has introduced the most modern style of payment: the 'credit card'. This frees shoppers from cheques or cash and even from financial difficulties. To pay, you just show your card and sign the bill. There's nothing more to it. And every month you get a statement which you can pay off in full or in monthly instalments. In this marriage of comfort, beauty and efficiency, the Parlysians are discovering the material conditions of happiness which our anarchic cities denied them. We are here at the heart of consumption as total organization of everyday life, total homogenization, where everything is taken over and super seded in the ease and translucidity of an abstract 'happiness', defined solely by the resolution of tensions. The drugstore writ large in the form of the shopping centre, the city of the future, is the sublimate of all real life, of all objective social life, in which not only work and money disappear, but also the seasons, those distant vestiges of a cycle which has at last also been homogenized! Work, leisure, nature and culture: all 30 The formal liturgy of the object these things which were once dispersed, which once generated anxiety and complexity in real life, in our 'anarchic and archaic towns and cities', all these sundered activities, these activities which were more or less irreducible one to another, are now at last mixed and blended, climatized and homogenized in the same sweeping vista of perpetual shopping. All are now rendered sexless in the same hermaphroditic ambience of fashion! All at last digested and turned into the same homogeneous faecal matter (naturally enough, this occurs precisely under the sign of the disappearance of liquid cash - too visible a symbol still of the real faecality of real life, and of the economic and social contradictions which once inhabited it). That is all over now. Controlled, lubricated, consumed faecality has passed into things; it seeps everywhere into the indistinct ness of things and social relations. Just as the gods of all countries coexisted syncretically in the Roman Pantheon in an immense 'digest', so all the gods - or demons - of consumption have come together in our Super Shopping Centre, which is our Pantheon - or Pandaemonium. In other words, all activities, labour, conflicts and seasons have been united and abolished in the same abstraction. The substance of life unified in this way, in this universal digest, can no longer have in it any meaning: what constituted the dreamwork, the labour of poetry and of meaning - in other words, the grand schemata of displacement and condensation, the great figures of metaphor and contradiction, which are based on the living interconnection of distinct elements - is no longer possible. The eternal substitution of homogeneous elements now reigns unchal lenged. There is no longer any symbolic function, but merely an eternal combinatory of 'ambience' in a perpetual springtime. 2 T he Miraculous Status of Consumption The Melanesian natives were thrilled by the planes which passed over head. But those objects never came down from the skies to them, whereas they did descend for the whites, doing so because there were, in certain places, similar objects on the ground to attract the flying air craft. So, the natives themselves set about building a simulacrum of an aeroplane from branches and creepers. They marked out a landing ground, which they painstakingly illuminated by night, and patiently waited for the real aircraft to alight on it. Without calling the anthropoid hunter-gatherers who today wander through our urban jungles primitives (though why not?), we might see this as a fable of the consumer society. The beneficiary of the consumer miracle also sets in place a whole array of sham objects, of characteristic signs of happiness, and then waits (waits desperately, a moralist would say) for happiness to alight. I do not mean to present this as a principle of analysis. What we have here is simply the private and collective consumer mentality. But at this rather superficial level, we may venture this comparison: consumption is governed by a form of magical thinking; daily life is governed by a mentality based on miraculous thinking, a primitive mentality, in so far as that has been defined as being based on a belief in the omnipotence of thoughts (though what we have in this case is a belief in the omni potence of signs). 'Affluence' is, in effect, merely the accumulation of the signs of happiness. The satisfactions which the objects themselves confer are the equivalent of the fake aircraft, the Melanesians' models, i.e. the anticipated reflection of the potential Great Satisfaction, of the Total Affluence, the last Jubilation of the definitive beneficiaries of the miracle, from whose insane hope daily banality draws its sustenance. These lesser satisfactions are as yet only exorcistic practices, means of calling down or summoning up total Well-being or Bliss. In everyday practice, the blessings of consumption are not experienced as resulting from work or from a production process; they are experi enced as a miracle. There is, admittedly, a difference between the Melanesian native and the viewer settling down in front of his TV set, turning the switch and waiting for images from the whole world to come down to him: the fact is that the images generally obey, whereas planes never condescend to land by magical command. But this technical 32 The formal liturgy of the object success is not sufficient to show that our conduct is realistic and the natives' behaviour imaginary. For the same psychical economy ensures on the one hand that the natives' confidence in magic is never destroyed (if the process fails to work, it is because they have not performed the necessary acts) and on the other that the miracle of TV is perpetually brought off, without ceasing to be a miracle - this latter by the grace of technology, which wipes out, so far as the consumer 's consciousness is concerned, the very principle of social reality, the long social process of production which leads to the consumption of images. And does this so well that the TV viewer, like the native, experiences the appropriation as a capturing in a mode of miraculous efficacy. The Cargo Myth Consumer goods thus present themselves as a harnessing of power, not as products embodying work. And, more generally, once severed from its objective determinations, the profusion of goods is felt as a blessing of nature, as a manna, a gift from heaven. On contact with the whites, the Melanesians (to turn again to them) developed a Messianic form of worship: the cargo cult. The whites, they reasoned, lived lives of plenty, whereas they had nothing. This was because the whites knew how to capture or divert the goods that were destined for them, the blacks, by their ancestors who had withdrawn to the ends of the earth. One day, when the white men's magic had been foiled, their ancestors would return with the miraculous cargo, and they would never again know want. Thus 'underdeveloped' peoples experience Western 'aid' as something natural and expected, something long due to them. As a magical remedy - having no relation to history, technology, continued progress and the world market. But if we look at all closely at them, do not the Western beneficiaries of the economic miracle behave collectively in the same way? Does not the mass of consumers experience plenty as an effect of nature, surrounded as they are by the fantasies of the Land of Cockaigne and persuaded by the advertisers' litany that all will be given to them and that they have a legitimate, inalienable right to plenty? Faith in consumption is a new element; the rising generations are now inheritors: they no longer merely inherit goods, but the natural right to abundance. And so the cargo myth lives again in the West whereas it is declining in Melanesia. For even if abundance is becoming a banal, daily fact, it continues to be experienced as a daily miracle, in so far as it does not appear to be something produced and extracted, something won after a historical and social effort, but something dispensed by a beneficent mythological agency to which we are the legitimate heirs: Technology, Progress, Growth, etc. This does not mean that our society is not firstly, objectively and The miraculous status of consumption 33 decisively a society of production, an order of production, and therefore the site of an economic and political strategy. But it means that there is entangled with that order an order of consumption, which is an order of the manipulation of signs. To that extent, we may draw a (no doubt venturesome) parallel with magical thought, for both of these live off signs and under the protection of signs. More and more basic aspects of our contemporary societies fall under a logic of significations, an analysis of codes and symbolic systems - though this does not make these societies primitive ones, and the problem of the historical production of these significations and codes remains fully intact - that analysis having to articulate itself to the analysis of the process of material and technical production as its theoretical continuation. The Consumed Vertigo of Catastrophe The usage of signs is always ambivalent. Its function is always a conjuring - both a conjuring up and a conjuring away: causing some thing to emerge in order to capture it in signs (forces, reality, happiness, etc.) and evoking something in order to deny and repress it. We know that, in its myths, magical thought seeks to conjure away change and history. In a way, the generalized consumption of images, of facts, of information aims also to conjure away the real with the signs of the real, to conjure away history with the signs of change, etc. Reality we consume in either anticipatory or retrospective mode. At any rate we do so at a distance, a distance which is that of the sign. For example, when Paris-Match showed us the secret forces assigned to protect the General [de Gaulle] training with machine-guns in the basement of the Prefecture, that image was not read as 'information', i.e. as referring to the political context and its elucidation. For every one of us, it bore within it the temptation of a superb assassination attempt, a prodigious violent event: the attempt will take place, it is going to take place; the image is the forerunner to it, and embodies the anticipated pleasure; all perversions have their acting-out. What we see here is the same inverse effect as in the expectation of miraculous abundance within the cargo cult. Cargo or catastrophe - in both cases, we have an effect of consumed vertigo. We may, admittedly, say that it is, then, our fantasies which come to be signified in the image and consumed in it. But this psychological aspect interests us less than what comes into the image to be both consumed in it and repressed: the real world, the event, history. What characterizes consumer society is the universality of the news item [Ie fait divers] in mass communication. All political, historical and cultural information is received in the same - at once anodyne and miraculous - form of the news item. It is entirely actualized - i.e. dramatized in the spectacular mode - and entirely deactualized - i.e. distanced by the 34 The formal liturgy of the object communication medium and reduced to signs. The news item is thus not one category among others, but the cardinal category of our magical thinking, of our mythology. That mythology is buttressed by the all the more voracious demand for reality, for 'truth', for 'objectivity'. Everywhere we find 'cinema-verite', live reporting, the newsflash, the high-impact photo, the eye-witness report, etc. Everywhere what is sought is the 'heart of the event', the 'heart of the battle', the 'live', the 'face to face' - the dizzy sense of a total presence at the event, the Great Thrill of Lived Reality - i.e. the miracle once again, since the truth of the media report, televised and taped, is precisely that I was not there. But it is the truer than true which counts or, in other words, the fact of being there without being there. Or, to put it yet another way, the fantasy. What mass communications give us is not reality, but the dizzying whirl of reality [Ie vertige de la realite]. Or again, without playing on words, a reality without the dizzying whirl, for the heart of Amazonia, the heart of reality, the heart of passion, the heart of war, this 'Heart' which is the locus of mass communications and which gives them their vertiginous sentimentality, is precisely the place where nothing happens. It is the allegorical sign of passion and of the event. And signs are sources of security. So we live, sheltered by signs, in the denial of the real. A miraculous security: when we look at the images of the world, who can distinguish this brief irruption of reality from the profound pleasure of not being there? The image, the sign, the message - all these things we 'consume' - represent our tranquillity consecrated by distance from the world, a distance more comforted by the allusion to the real (even where the allusion is violent) than compromised by it. The content of the messages, the signifieds of the signs are largely immaterial. We are not engaged in them, and the media do not involve us in the world, but offer for our consumption signs as signs, albeit signs accredited with the guarantee of the real. It is here that we can define the praxis of consumption. The consumer's relation to the real world, to politics, to history, to culture is not a relation of interest, investment or committed responsibility - nor is it one of total indifference: it is a relation of curiosity. On the same pattern, we can say that the dimension of consumption as we have defined it here is not one of knowledge of the world, nor is it one of total ignorance: it is the dimension of misrecognition. Curiosity and misrecognition denote one and the same form of overall behaviour towards the real, a form of behaviour generalized and sys tematized by the practice of mass communications and characteristic, therefore, of our 'consumer society'. This is the denial of the real on the basis of an avid and repeated apprehending of its signs. We can at the same time define the locus of consumption: daily life. This latter is not merely the sum of daily doings, the dimension of banality The miraculous status of consumption 35 and repetition: it is a system of interpretation. Everydayness is the separa tion of a total praxis into a transcendent, autonomous and abstract sphere (of the political, the social, the cultural) and the immanent, closed, abstract sphere of the 'private'. Work, leisure, family, acquaintances: the individual reorganizes all these things in an involutive mode, this side of the world and of history, in a coherent system based on the closure of the private, the formal freedom of the individual, the securitizing appropriation of the environment, and misrecognition. Everydayness is, from the objective point of view of the totality, impoverished and residual, but it is, by contrast, triumphant and euphoric in its effort totally to autonomize and reinterpret the world 'for internal consump tion'. It is here that there is profound, organic collusion between the sphere of private everydayness and mass communications. Everydayness as closure, as Verborgenheit, would be unbearable with out the simulacrum of the world, without the alibi of participation in the world. It has to be fuelled by the images, the repeated signs of that transcendence. As we have seen, its tranquillity needs the vertiginous spin of reality and history. Its tranquillity requires perpetual consumed violence for its own exaltation. That is its particular obscenity. It is partial to events and violence, provided the violence is served up at room temperature. The caricature image of this has the TV viewer lounging in front of images of the Vietnam War. The TV image, like a window turned outside-in, opens initially on to a room and, in that room, the cruel exteriority of the world becomes something intimate and warm - warm with a perverse warmth. At this 'lived' level, consumption makes maximum exclusion from the (real, social, historical) world the maximum index of security. It seeks the resolution of tensions - that happiness by default. But it runs up against a contradiction: the contradiction between the passivity implied by this new value system and the norms of a social morality which, in essentials, remains one of voluntarism, action, efficacy and sacrifice. Hence, the intense sense of guilt which attaches to this new style of hedonistic behaviour and the urgent need, clearly outlined by the 'strategists of desire', to take the guilt out of passivity. For millions of people without histories, and happy to be so, passivity has to be rendered guiltless. And this is where spectacular dramatization by the mass media comes in (the accident/ catastrophe report as a generalized category of all messages): in order for this contradiction between puritanical and hedonistic morality to be resolved, this tranquillity of the private sphere has to appear as a value preserved only with great difficulty, constantly under threat and beset by the dangers of a catastrophic destiny. The violence and inhumanity of the outside world are needed not just so that security may be experi enced more deeply as security (in the economy of enjoyment [jouissance]), but also so that it should be felt justifiable at every moment as an option (in the economy of the morality of salvation). The signs of destiny, passion and fatality must flourish around the preserved zone in order 36 The formal liturgy of the object that everydayness may seize back the grandeur and sublimity of which it is, precisely, the reverse side. Fatality is thus evoked and signified on all sides, so that banality may revel in it and find favour. The fact that road accidents play so extraordinarily well on radio and TV, in the press, in individual conversation and in the talk of the nation proves this: the crash is the finest exemplar of 'daily fatality'. If it is exploited with such passion, this is because it performs an essential collective function. The litany of road deaths is rivalled only by the litany of weather forecasts. In fact the two form a mythic couple - the obsession with the sun and the litany of death are inseparable. Everydayness thus offers this curious mix of euphoric justification by 'social standing' and passivity, on the one hand, and the delectatio morosa of potential victims of destiny on the other. The whole forms a specific mentality or, rather, 'sentimentality'. The consumer society sees itself as an encircled Jerusalem, rich and threatened. That is its ideology.1 3 T he Vicious Circle of Growth Collective Expenditure and Redistribution Consumer society is not characterized merely by the rapid growth of individual expenditure. It is also accompanied by the growth of expend iture met by third parties (by the government in particular) for the benefit of private individuals, the purpose of some of this being to reduce the inequality of the distribution of resources. This proportion of collective expenditure meeting individual needs has risen from 13 per cent of total consumption in 1959 to 17 per cent in 1965. In 1965, the percentage of needs met by third parties was: • 1 per cent for food and clothing (,subsistence'); • 13 per cent for housing expenses, transport and communication networks ('the environment'); • 67 per cent in the fields of education, culture, sport and health ('protection and development of the person'). Collective expenditure is clearly channelled more towards human beings, then, than into the goods and material equipment made available for their use. Similarly, public expenditure is at its highest under the budget heads which look set to grow fastest. But it is interesting to note, with E. Lisle, that it was precisely in this sector where the community assumes the greater part of expenditure, in the sector which it has developed most intensively, that the crisis of May 1968 broke out. In France, the 'social budget of the nation' redistributes more than 20 per cent of gross internal production (the national education system alone absorbs the total of taxes on personal incomes). The heavy dis parity between private consumption and collective expenditure which Galbraith attacks seems much more characteristic of the United States than of the European nations. But this is not the issue. The real problem is whether this state expenditure makes for an objective equalization of social chances. Now, it seems clear that this 'redistribution' has little effect on social discrimination at all levels. As for inequality of standards of living, comparison of the two studies on family budgets made in 1956 and 1965 shows no reduction in the discrepancies. We know the incurable, hereditary disparities which apply in the field of education: where other mechanisms more subtle than the economic are in play, the use of economic redistribution alone very largely amounts to reinforcing the mechanisms of cultural inertia. The proportion of 1 7-year-olds in full- 38 The formal liturgy of the object time education is 52 per cent: 90 per cent for the children of senior managers, professionals and teachers, less than 40 per cent for farmers and workers. In higher education, the chances of access for boys in the former category are more than 33 per cent, but only 1 or 2 per cent for the latter. In the health field, the redistributive effects are not clear: among the active population, there would seem to be an absence of redistribution, as though each social category were at least intent on getting back what it paid in contributions. As regards taxation and social security, let us examine what E. Lisle has to say on the topic. Growing public consumption is financed by the development of taxes and other contributions: where social security alone is concerned, the ratio of contributions to total wage costs has risen from 23.9 per cent in 1959 to 25.9 per cent in 1967. Social security thus costs employed workers a quarter of their resources, it being fair to regard the so-called 'employers' contributions' as a deduction at source from workers' incomes, as is also the 5 per cent fixed-rate contribution. The total of these deductions is much higher than the sum deducted in income tax. Since the latter is progressive, but social security contributions and the fixed-rate contribution are regressive, the net effect of tax and other deductions is regressive. If we accept that indirect taxation, which mainly takes the form of VAT, is proportional to consumption, we may conclude that direct and indirect taxation and the social contributions paid by households and very largely earmarked for the financing of collective consumption would not, overall, have any effect of reducing inequality or any redistributive impact. So far as the effectiveness of public amenities is concerned, the available studies show frequent 'deflections' from the intentions of the authorities. When these amenities are designed for the most deprived, we gradually see their 'clientele' becoming more varied, with this diversification leading to an affective rejection, more for psychological than financial reasons, of the poor. When the amenities are intended to be open to all, the elimination of the weakest members of the community occurs from the outset. The effort to achieve open access usually ends in a segregation reflecting the social hier archy. This would seem to indicate that in a highly inegalitarian society, political actions aimed at ensuring formal equality of access more often than not have increased the degree of inequality. (Commission du Plan, Consomma tion et Mode de Vie) Inequality with regard to death rates remains very great. Once again, then, the unadorned figures have no meaning and the increase in available resources - a green light to affluence - has to be interpreted in its real social logic. Social redistribution and, in particular, the effectiveness of public action has to be questioned. Should we regard this 'deviant' performance on the part of 'social' redistribution, this restoration of social inequalities by the very mechanisms which are supposed to eliminate them, as a temporary anomaly due to the inertia of the social structure? Or should we, rather, formulate the radical hypothesis that the mechanisms of redistribution, which are so success ful in preserving privilege, are in fact an integral part, a tactical element, of the power system - and hand in glove in that regard with the The vicious circle of growth 39 educational and electoral systems? There would then be no point deplor ing the repeated failure of a social policy: we should, rather, have to conclude that it was performing its real function to perfection.1 In spite of certain findings, the evaluation of the effect of transfers, as regards both redistribution and the orientation of consumption, must be delicately handled. If the overall effect of transfers has, in the long run, made it possible to reduce the range of net incomes by half, the relative stability of this distribution of net incomes has only been achieved at the cost of a very great increase in the sums redistributed. Environmental Nuisance The advances of affluence - that is to say, of the possession of ever more goods and individual and collective amenities - have been accompanied by increasingly serious 'environmental nuisances' which are a con sequence, on the one hand, of industrial development and technical progress, and, on the other, of the very structures of consumption. First, we have seen the degradation of our shared living space by economic activities: noise, air and water pollution, environmental destruction, the disruption of residential zones by the development of new amenities (airports, motorways, etc.). Traffic congestion produces a colossal deficit in technical, psychological and human terms. Yet what does this matter, since the necessary excess of infrastructural building, the extra expenditure on petrol, the costs of treatment for accident victims, etc. will all be totted up as consumption, i.e. will become, under cover of the gross national product and statistics, an indication of growth and wealth! Does the flourishing mineral water industry permit us to speak of a real increase in 'affluence' since, to a large extent, it is merely a response to the deficient quality of urban water? And so on. We should never be done with listing all the productive and consumer activities which merely counteract internal nuisances generated by the system of growth. Once it has passed a certain threshold, extra productivity is almost entirely wiped out, swallowed up, by this homoeopathic treatment of growth by growth. The 'cultural nuisance effects' caused by the technical and cultural effects of rationalization and mass production are, of course, strictly incalculable. Moreover, value judgements prevent us from defining common criteria. It would not be possible objectively to characterize the 'nuisance effect' of a grim housing estate or a 'Z feature' movie, as we might do with water pollution. Only a civil service inspector could propose, as happened at a recent congress, the creation, alongside a 'clean air ministry', of a 'crime of offending the intelligence' to protect the populace against the effects of the sensationalist press! But we may admit that nuisance effects of this kind are growing at the same pace as affluence. 40 The formal liturgy of the object The built-in obsolescence of products and machines, the destruction of old structures by which certain needs were met, and the increasing number of bogus innovations that are of no appreciable benefit to our lives may all be added to the balance sheet here. Perhaps even more serious than the downgrading of products and machinery is the fact, pointed out by E. Lisle, that the cost of rapid progress in the production of wealth is the mobility of labour, and therefore the instability of employment. A turnover and retraining of human beings which has very serious social costs and, most importantly, produces a general sense of insecurity. The psychological and social pressures of mobility, of status and competition at all levels (income, prestige, culture, etc.) are becoming more burdensome for everyone. It takes longer to recover, to get back to one's best, and offset the psychological and nervous wear and-tear produced by the wide range of nuisances: the journey to work, overpopulation, continual stress and aggression . . . In short, the major cost of the consumer society is the sense of generalized insecurity it engenders. Which leads to the system, as it were, devouring itself: In this rapid growth . . . which inevitably engenders inflationist tensions . . . a non-negligible fraction of the population is not able to keep up with the pace. These people are 'left on the scrapheap'. And those who stay the course and achieve the mode of life which is proposed as the model do so only at the cost of an effort which leaves them diminished. With the result that society finds itself compelled to cushion the social costs of growth by redistributing a growing proportion of the gross internal product into social investments (education, research, health) which are designed, above all, to serve growth. (E. Lisle) Now, these compensatory expenditures, whether private or collective, which are intended to cope with dysfunctions rather than increase positive satisfaction, are added in, in all the accounts, as part of the rise in the standard of living. Not to mention the consumption of drugs, alcohol and all the other conspicuous or compensatory expenditures, or the military budgets, etc. All of this is growth and, hence, affluence. The growing number of categories of people 'dependent on society', though not actually a nuisance as such (the battle against illness and the decline in mortality being one of the aspects of 'affluence' - a consumer demand), nonetheless puts a heavy financial burden on the process itself. Ultimately, writes J. Bourgeois-Pichat, 'one might imagine the part of the population whose activity is devoted to maintaining the good health of the country's inhabitants growing larger than the part that is actually involved in production.' In short, we are everywhere reaching a point where the dynamic of growth and affluence is becoming circular and generating only wheel spin and where, increasingly, the system is exhausting itself in its own reproduction. A threshold where the wheels turn, but do not advance, where the entire increase in productivity goes into maintaining the system's conditions of survival. The only objective result, then, is the cancerous growth of figures and balance sheets. In all essentials, how ever, we are returning, in strict terms, to the primitive state, which is that The vicious circle of growth 41 of absolute penury, the state of the animal or the native, all of whose energies are devoted to survival. Or the state of those who, as Daumal has it, 'plant potatoes so as to be able to eat potatoes, so as to be able to plant potatoes again, etc.' Now, a system is inefficient when its cost is equal to, or higher than, its output. We are not at that point. But, through nuisances and the social and technical correctives to those nuisances, we can see on the horizon a general tendency towards a tentacular internal functioning of the system. With 'dysfunctional' consumption, both individ ual and collective, rising more quickly than the 'functional', the system is basically becoming parasitic upon itself. The Accounting of Growth or the Mystique of GNP In this reference to mystique, we are speaking of the most extraordinary collective bluff on the part of modern societies - of an operation of 'white magic' on the figures which in reality conceals a black magic of collective bewitchment. We are speaking of the absurd gymnastics of accounting illusions, of national accounts. Nothing enters into these except factors which are visible and measurable by the criteria of economic rationality, and that indeed is the central principle of the magic. Research, culture and women's domestic labour are all excluded from these accounts on this basis, though certain things which have no business there do figure in them, merely because they are measurable. Moreover, like dreams, they have no conception of the negative and lump together everything - nuisances and positive elements - in the most total (though by no means innocent) illogicality. Economists lump together the value of all products and services of all kinds, making no distinction between public and private services. Nuisances and palliatives to them figure in the accounts on the same basis as the production of objectively useful goods. 'Motion pictures, television, cars, and the vast opportunities which go with mobility, together with such less enchanting merchandise as narcotics, comic books, and pornographia, are all included in an advancing gross national product. '2 The deficit side - damage and obsolescence - does not figure in the accounts or, if it does, it figures positively! The costs of travel to work, for example, are accounted as consumer expenditure! This is the logical result, expressed in figures, of the magical goal of production for its own sake: every article produced is sacralized by the very fact of its being produced. Every article produced is positive, every measurable thing is positive. The 30 per cent reduction in the luminosity of air in Paris over the past 50 years is regarded as external and non-existent by the accountants. But if it results in a greater expenditure of electrical energy, of light bulbs and spectacles, etc., then it exists - and exists, moreover, as an increase in production and social wealth! Any restrictive or selective infringement of 42 The formal liturgy of the object the sacred principle of production and growth is met with cries of sacrilege ('We shall not touch one screw of Concorde!'). As a collective obsession consigned to the accounting ledgers, productivity primarily has the social function of a myth. And anything can be used to fuel that myth - even the conversion of objective realities which refute it into figures which confirm it. But there is perhaps in this mythic algebra of financial accounts a profound truth, the truth of the economico-political system of growth societies. It seems paradoxical to us that the positive and the negative should be added together indiscriminately. But it is perhaps quite simply logical. For the truth is perhaps that it is the 'negative' goods, the nuisances compensated, the internal operating costs, the social costs of 'dysfunctional' endoregulation, the subsidiary sectors of useless prodigality which play the dynamic role of economic engine in that set-up. This latent truth of the system is, of course, hidden by the figures, the magical addition of which conceals this admirable circularity of the positive and the negative (alcohol sales and hospital building, etc.). And this would explain the impossibility, despite all efforts and at all levels, of rooting out these negative aspects: the system lives by them and cannot rid itself of them. We shall meet this problem again in connection with poverty, that 'balancing counterforce' of poverty which growth societies 'drag along behind them' as a defect and which is in fact one of their most serious 'nuisances'. We have to accept the hypothesis that all these nuisances somewhere enter into the equation as positive factors, as continual factors of growth, as boosters of production and consumption. In the eighteenth century, in The Fable of the Bees, Mandeville proposed the theory (already regarded as sacrilegious and libertine in his day) that a society achieves equilibrium not through its virtues but through its vices, and that social peace, progress and human happiness are obtained by the instinctive immorality which leads them continually to break the rules. He was, of course, speaking of morality, but we may construe his words in a social and economic sense. It is, precisely, by its hidden defects, its balancing forces, its nuisances, and what seem like vices when compared with a rational system, that the real system prospers. Mandeville was accused of cynicism: it is the social order, the order of production, which is objectively cynicaP Waste We know how much the affluence of rich societies is linked to waste, given all the talk of a 'throwaway society' and the fact that some have even envisaged a 'garbage-can sociology': 'Tell me what you throw away and I'll tell you who you are!' But the statistics of waste and rubbish are not interesting in themselves: they are merely a redundant marker of the volume of goods on offer, and their profusion. We can understand The vicious circle of growth 43 neither waste nor its functions if we see in it only the residual scraps of what is made to be consumed but is not. Once again, we have here a simplistic definition of consumption - a moral definition based on the imperative utility of goods. So, all our moralists rail against the squan dering of wealth - from the actions of the private individual who no longer respects that kind of moral law internal to the object which its use value is taken to be and the object's time-span (the individual who throws his goods away or changes them to comply with the whims of prestige or fashion, etc.) to waste on the national and international scale - and even on a kind of global scale, where the human race is seen as squandering wealth in its general economy and its exploitation of natural resources. In short, waste is always considered a kind of madness, of insanity, of instinctual dysfunction, which causes man to burn his reserves and compromise his survival conditions by irrational practice. This vision at least betrays the fact that we are not in an era of real affluence, that every present-day individual, group or society, and even the species as such, stands under the sign of scarcity. Now, it is generally the same people who maintain the myth of the inevitable coming of affluence who deplore waste, linked to the menacing spectre of scarcity. At any event, this whole moral vision of waste as dysfunction needs to be reviewed from the perspective of a sociological analysis which would bring out its true functions. All societies have always wasted, squandered, expended and con sumed beyond what is strictly necessary for the simple reason that it is in the consumption of a surplus, of a superfluity that the individual - and society - feel not merely that they exist, but that they are alive. That consumption may go so far as consumation, pure and simple destruction, which then takes on a specific social function. In potlatch, for example, it is the competitive destruction of precious goods which sets the seal on social organization. The Kwakiutl sacrifice blankets, canoes, etched 'coppers', which they burn or throw into the sea to 'maintain their rank,' to assert their value. And, again, it is by 'wasteful expenditure' that the aristocratic classes have asserted their pre-eminence down the ages. The notion of utility, which has rationalistic, economistic origins, thus needs to be revised in light of a much more general social logic in which waste, far from being an irrational residue, takes on a positive function, taking over where rational utility leaves off to play its part in a higher social functionality - a social logic in which waste even appears ultimately as the essential function, the extra degree of expenditure, superfluity, the ritual uselessness of 'expenditure for nothing' becoming the site of production of values, differences and meanings on both the individual and the social level. Within this perspective, a definition of consumption as consumation - i.e. as productive waste - begins to emerge, a per spective contrary to that of the 'economic' (based on necessity, accumula tion and calculation) and one in which, by contrast, the superfluous precedes the necessary, and expenditure takes precedence in terms of 44 The formal liturgy of the object value over accumulation and appropriation (even if it does not precede them in time). '0 reason not the need! Our basest beggars/ Are in the poorest thing superfluous. / Allow not nature more than nature needs, ! Man's life is cheap as beast's: writes Shakespeare in King Lear [Act II, Scene iv] . In other words, one of the fundamental problems posed by consumption is the following: do human beings organize themselves for purposes of survival, or in terms of the individual or collective meaning they give to their lives? Now, this value of 'being', this structural value may involve the sacrifice of economic values. And this problem is not metaphysical. It is at the centre of consumption and may be expressed as follows: does not affluence ultimately only have meaning in wastage? Should we define affluence in terms of foresight and the laying in of provisions, as Valery does? When one contemplates piles of imperishable foodstuffs, is one not looking at time in hand and activity spared? A box of biscuits is a whole month of idleness and life. Pots of conserves and fibre baskets stuffed with seeds and nuts are a storehouse of quietude; a whole winter of tranquillity lies hoarded up in their aroma . . . Robinson Crusoe could smell the presence of the future in the coffers and chests in his store-room. His hoard radiated idleness. A sense of time emanated from it, in the way an absolute heat emanates from certain metals . . . Humanity only raised itself up slowly by finding a footing on that which endures. Foresight and the laying in of provisions gradually freed us from the rigours of our animal necessities and the 'word-for-word' character of our wants . . . Nature suggested this: it so arranged matters that we carried with us the means of resisting somewhat the inconstancy of events; the fat which is on our limbs, the memory which stands ready in the depth of our souls are models of stores laid up which our industry has imitated. This is the economic principle to which Nietzsche's (and also Bataille's) vision of the living being, who wants above all to 'expend his strength', stands opposed: Physiologists should think again before positing the 'instinct of preservation' as the cardinal drive in an organic creature. A living thing wants above all to discharge its force: 'preservation' is only a consequence of this. Beware of superfluous teleological principles! The entire concept 'instinct of preservation' is one of them . . . The 'struggle for existence' - this formula refers to an exceptional situation; the rule is much rather the struggle for power, the ambition to have 'more' and 'better' and 'quicker' and 'more often'. (Nietzsche, The Will to Power [Fragment 650]) This 'something more' by which value asserts itself may become the 'something of one's own'. This law of symbolic value, which states that the essential element always lies beyond what is indispensable, is best illustrated in expenditure, in loss, but it may also be verified in appro priation, provided that the latter has the differential function of being extra, of being 'something more'. As witness the Soviet example: the worker, the cadre, the engineer and the party member have a flat which does not belong to them: whether rented or granted for life, it is accommodation which goes with the job, tied to the social status of The vicious circle of growth 45 worker and active citizen, not to the private person. This good is a social service, not a piece of property, nor even less a 'consumable'. On the other hand, the secondary residence, the dacha in the country with its garden, is something which belongs to them. Neither is this a lifetime possession, nor is it revocable, and it can survive them and become hereditary. Hence the 'individualistic' infatuation attaching to it: all efforts are directed towards the acquisition of that dacha (for want of automobiles, which to some extent play this same 'second home' role in the West). The dacha has a prestige value and a symbolic value: it is the 'something more'. In a way, it is the same with affluence: for this to become a value, there has to be not simply enough, but too much. A significant difference has to be maintained and manifested between the necessary and the super fluous. This is the function of waste at all levels. By this, I mean that it is illusory to wish to reduce it, to aspire to eliminating it, for it is waste, in some way, which orientates the whole system. Indeed, just like the gadget (where does usefulness end, uselessness begin?), it can be neither defined nor delimited. All production and expenditure beyond the needs of strict survival can be termed waste (not just fashion in clothing and the food 'dustbin', but military super-gadgets, the 'Bomb', the super fluous agricultural equipment of certain American farmers, and the industrialists who renew their machinery every two years rather than getting the full value out of it: not only consumption, but production too - not to mention politics - largely obeys the laws of ostentatious processes). Profitable and sumptuary investments are everywhere in extricably interlinked. An industrialist who had invested 1,000 dollars in advertising declared: 'I know half of it is wasted, but I don't know which half.' This is always how it is in a complex economy: you cannot isolate what is useful or try to remove what is superfluous. Moreover, the (economically) 'wasted' half is not perhaps the half which takes on the least value, in the long term or, viewed more subtly, even in the very act of being 'lost'. We have to interpret the immense wastage of our affluent societies this way. It is that wastage which defies scarcity and, contradictorily, signifies abundance. It is not utility, but that wastage which, in its essence, lays down the psychological, sociological and economic guidelines for affluence. Is not the fact that the glass packaging can be thrown away the mark of the golden age? One of the great themes of mass culture, as analysed by Riesman and Morin, illustrates this in an epic register: this is the theme of the hero of consumption. In the West, at least, the impassioned biographies of heroes of production are everywhere giving way today to biographies of heroes of consumption. The great exemplary lives of self-made men and founders, pioneers, explorers and colonizers, which succeeded those of saints and historical figures, have today given way to the lives of movie 46 The formal liturgy of the object stars, sporting or gambling heroes, of a handful of gilded princes or globe-trotting barons - in a word, the lives of great wastrels (even if the imperative is often that they be shown, by contrast, in their daily 'simplicity', doing their shopping, etc.). With all these great dinosaurs who fill the magazines and TV programmes, it is always the excessive ness of their lives, the potential for outrageous expenditure that is exalted. Their superhuman quality is the whiff of potlatch that attaches to them. In this way, they fulfil a very precise social function: that of sumptuary, useless, inordinate expenditure. They fulfil this function by proxy for the whole social body, like the kings, heroes, priests or great parvenus of bygone ages. Like them, indeed, they are never so great as when, like James Dean, they pay for this elevated position with their lives. The essential difference is that, in our current system, this spectacular squandering no longer has the crucial symbolic and collective significa tion it could assume in primitive feasting and potlatch. This prestigious consumation, too, has been 'personalized' and mass-mediafied. Its func tion is to provide the economic stimulus for mass consumption, which is defined in relation to it as a subculture of labour. The caricature of the magnificent dress which the star wears for just one evening are the 'disposable panties' which, 80 per cent viscose and 20 per cent non woven acrylic, can be put on in the morning and thrown away at night, and need no washing. Above all, this sublime, de luxe wastage high lighted by the mass media merely replicates, on the cultural level, a much more fundamental and systematic wastage which, for its part, is integrated directly into economic processes, a junctional, bureaucratic wastage produced by the production system as it produces material goods, a wastage built into them and, therefore, obligatorily consumed as one of the qualities and dimensions of objects of consumption: their fragility, their built-in obsolescence, their condemnation to transience. What is produced today is not produced for its use-value or its possible durability, but rather with an eye to its death, and the increase in the speed with which that death comes about is equalled only by the speed of price rises. This alone would be sufficient to throw into question the 'rational istic' postulates of the whole of economic science on utility, needs, etc. Now, we know that the order of production only survives by paying the price of this extermination, this perpetual calculated 'suicide' of the mass of objects, and that this operation is based on technological 'sabotage' or organized obsolescence under cover of fashion. Advertising achieves the marvellous feat of consuming a substantial budget with the sole aim not of adding to the use-value of objects, but of subtracting value from them, of detracting from their time-value by subordinating them to their fashion value and to ever earlier replacement. And we may leave aside here the colossal quantities of social wealth sacrificed on military budgets and other state and bureaucratic prestige expenditure: that kind of prodigal ity no longer has any symbolic odour of potlatch about it; it is a The vicious circle of growth 47 desperate, but vital solution for an economico-political system in dis tress. This 'consumption' at the highest level is part of the consumer society, of the same order as the convulsive craving for objects at the level of the private individual. The two conjointly ensure the reproduc tion of the order of production. And we have to distinguish individual or collective waste as a symbolic act of expenditure, as a festive ritual and an exalted form of socialization, from its gloomy, bureaucratic caricature in our societies, where wasteful consumption has become a daily obliga tion, a forced and often unconscious institution like indirect taxation, a cool participation in the constraints of the economic order. 'Smash up your car, the insurance will do the rest! ' Indeed, the car is without doubt one of the main foci of daily and long-term waste, both private and collective. Not only is it so by its systematically reduced use value, its systematically increased prestige and fashion coefficient, and the outrageous sums invested in it, but - without doubt much more deeply than this - by the spectacular collective sacrifice of sheet-metal, machinery and human lives in the Accident. The Accident: that gigantic 'happening', the finest offered by consumer society, through which society affords itself in the ritual destruction of materials and life the proof of its excessive affluence (a proof a contrario, but one that is much more effective in the depths of the imagination than the direct proof by accumulation) . The consumer society needs its objects in order to be. More precisely, it needs to destroy them. The use of objects leads only to their dwindling disappearance. The value created is much more intense in violent loss. This is why destruction remains the fundamental alternative to production: consumption is merely an intermediate term between the two. There is a profound tendency within consumption for it to surpass itself, to trans figure itself in destruction. It is in destruction that it acquires its meaning. Most of the time in daily life today, it remains subordinate - as a managed consumptivity - to the order of productivity. This is why, most of the time, objects are present by their absence, and why their very abundance paradoxically signifies penury. Stock is the excessive expres sion of lack and a mark of anxiety. Only in destruction are objects there in excess and only then, in their disappearance, do they attest to wealth. At any rate, it is clear that destruction, either in its violent and symbolic form (the happening, potlatch, destructive acting-out, both individual and collective) or in its form of systematic and institutional destructive ness, is fated to become one of the preponderant functions of post industrial society.  PART II T HE T HEORY OF CONSUMPT ION 4 T he Social Logic of Consumption The Egalitarian Ideology of Well-Being The whole of the discourse on needs is based on a naIve anthropology: that of the natural propensity to happiness. Happiness, written in letters of fire behind the least little advert for bathsalts or the Canary Islands, is the absolute reference of the consumer society: it is the strict equivalent of salvation. But what is this happiness which haunts modern civilization with such ideological force? Here again one has to revise all spontaneous conceptions. The ideo logical force of the notion of happiness does not originate in a natural propensity on the part of each individual to realize that happiness for himself. It derives, socio-historically, from the fact that the myth of happiness is the one which, in modern societies, takes up and comes to embody the myth of Equality. All the political and sociological virulence with which that myth has been charged since the industrial revolution and the revolutions of the nineteenth century has been transferred to Happiness. The fact that Happiness initially has that signification and that ideological function has important consequences for its content: to be the vehicle of the egalitarian myth, Happiness has to be measurable. It has to be a well-being measurable in terms of objects and signs; it has to be 'comfort', as Tocqueville put it, already noting this trend of demo cratic societies towards ever more well-being as a reduction of the impact of social misfortune and an equalization of all destinies. Happiness as total or inner enjoyment - that happiness independent of the signs which could manifest it to others and to those around us, the happiness which has no need of evidence - is therefore excluded from the outset from the consumer ideal in which happiness is, first and foremost, the demand for equality (or distinction, of course) and must, accordingly, always signify with 'regard' to visible criteria. In this sense, Happiness is even further removed from any collective 'feast' or exaltation since, fuelled by an egalitarian exigency, it is based on individualistic principles, fortified by the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen which explicitly recognize the right to Happiness of everyone (of each individual). 50 The theory of consumption The 'Revolution of Well-Being' is heir to, or executor of, the Bourgeois Revolution, or simply of any revolution which proclaims human equality as its principle without being able (or without wishing) fundamentally to bring it about. The democratic principle is then transferred from a real equality of capacities, of responsibilities, of social chances and of happi ness (in the full sense of the term) to an equality before the Object and other manifest signs of social success and happiness. This is the democracy of social standing, the democracy of the TV, the car and the stereo, an apparently concrete but, in fact, equally formal democracy which, beyond contradictions and social inequalities, corresponds to the formal democracy enshrined in the Constitution. Both of these, the one serving as an alibi for the other, combine in a general democratic ideology which conceals the absence of democracy and the non-existence of equality. In the mystique of equality, the notion of 'needs' is indissociable from that of well-being. Needs point to a reassuring universe of ends, and this naturalistic anthropology lays the ground for the promise of a universal equality. The implicit argument is as follows: all men are equal before need and before the principle of satisfaction, since all men are equal before the use-value of objects and goods (whereas they are unequal and divided before exchange-value). Need being indexed to use-value, we have here a relationship of objective utility or natural finality, in the face of which there is no longer any social or historical inequality. At the meat-and-drink level (use-value), there are no proletarians, no privileged individuals. Thus the complementary myths of well-being and needs have a powerful ideological function of reducing, of eliminating the objective, social and historical, determinations of inequality. The whole political game of the welfare state and consumer society consists in surmounting their contradictions by increasing the volume of goods, with the prospect of an automatic equalization by quantity and a level of final equilibrium, which would be that of total well-being for all. Communist societies themselves speak in terms of equilibrium, of 'natural' individual or social needs, needs 'harmonized' and free of all social differentiation or class connotation. In this, they too drift from a political solution to a definitive solution by abundance, substituting the formal equality of goods for the social transparency of exchanges. Thus we also see the 'Revolution of Well-Being' taking over from the social and political revolution in the socialist countries. If this perspective on the ideology of well-being is correct (namely, that that ideology is a vehicle for the myth of formal equality 'secularized' in goods and signs), then it is clear that the eternal problem of whether consumer society promotes or hinders equality, whether it is a fully achieved democracy (or on the way to being so) or the opposite - merely restoring earlier inequalities and social structures - is a false problem. Whether or not one is able to prove that consumption possibilities are being equalized (income differentials being flattened out, social re- The social logic of consumption 51 distribution, the same fashion for everyone, along with the same TV programmes and holiday destinations), this means nothing, since posing the problem in terms of the equalization of consumption is already to substitute the pursuit of objects and signs (level of substitution) for the real problems and their logical and sociological analysis. All in all, analysing Affluence does not mean seeking its verification in the statis tics, which can only be as mythic as the myth, but radically changing focus and approaching the myth of Affluence with a logic other than its own. Analysis does, of course, require that we assess affluence in terms of figures, that we draw up the balance sheet of well-being. But the figures do not speak for themselves, and they never provide any counter argument. Only interpretations speak, sometimes to one side of, some times against, the figures. Let us listen to what they have to say. The most stubborn and unyielding of these is the idealist version: • growth means affluence; • affluence means democracy. It being impossible to conclude that this state of total felicity is imminent (even at the statistical level), the myth becomes more 'realistic' and we have the ideal-reformist variant: the large-scale inequalities of the first phase of growth are diminishing, there is no 'iron law' any longer, incomes are becoming harmonized. The hypothesis of a smooth, con tinuous progress towards ever more equality is, of course, refuted by certain facts (the 'Other America': 20 per cent living in poverty, etc.). But these point to a temporary dysfunction, to teething troubles. Growth, while producing certain inegalitarian effects, implies an overall, long term democratization. Thus, in Galbraith's view, the problem of equality ! inequality is no longer relevant. It was linked to the problem of wealth and poverty and the structures of the 'affluent' society have resolved the problem, despite an unequal redistribution. The 'poor ' (the 20 per cent) are those who remain, for one reason or another, outside the industrial system, outside growth. The principle of growth itself remains inviolate; it is homogeneous and is tending to homogenize the entire social body. The basic question which arises at this level is the question of this 'poverty'. For the idealists of affluence, it is 'residual'; it will be cleared up by additional growth. Yet it seems to carry on down the post industrial generations and all efforts to eliminate it (particularly in the USA, with the 'great society') seem to run up against some mechanism of the system which seems to reproduce it functionally at each stage of development, like a kind of drag on growth, a kind of mechanism indispensable to the general wealth. Should we believe Galbraith when he imputes this inexplicable residual poverty to the dysfunctions of the system (the priority accorded to military and other wasteful expenditure, a lagging of public services behind private consumption, etc.) or should 52 The theory of consumption we turn his argument around and conclude that growth, in its very dynamic, is based on this disequilibrium? Galbraith is very contradictory on this: all his analyses tend to demonstrate in a sense how its defects are functionally implicated in the system of growth, yet he recoils before the logical conclusions which would challenge the system itself and recasts everything in a liberal perspective. Generally, the idealists do not go beyond this paradoxical affirmation: in spite of everything, and by a devilish inversion of its aims (which, as everyone knows, cannot but be beneficent), growth produces, reproduces and restores social inequality, privileges, disequilibria, etc. They will admit, for example, as Galbraith does in The Affluent Society, that, ultimately, it is an increase in production which takes over the re distributive role ('As there comes to be more and more . . . so there will in the end be enough for everyone' - these principles, based on the physics of fluids, are never true in a social relations context, where, as we shall see below, things work in precisely the opposite way). Moreover, from these principles, Galbraith derives an argument for the under privileged, to the effect that even those on the bottom rung of the ladder have more to gain from an accelerated growth of production than from any other form of redistribution. But this is all specious: for, if growth grants everyone access to an income and a volume of goods which are higher in absolute terms, what is sociologically characteristic is the process of distortion which sets in at the very heart of growth. It is the rate of distortion which subtly structures growth and gives it its true meaning. It is so much easier to content oneself with the spectacular disappearance of a particular extreme form of penury or certain secondary inequalities, to assess affluence by statistics and general quantities, by absolute increa ses and gross national products, than to analyse it in terms of structures! Structurally, it is the rate of distortion which is significant. It is that rate which, at an international level, marks the growing distance between the underdeveloped countries and the overdeveloped nations, and also, within those nations, the lower incomes falling further behind the higher, failing industries losing ground to the high-technology sectors, rural areas losing out to urban, industrial areas, etc. Chronic inflation allows this relative pauperization to be masked, by revising all nominal values upwards, whereas the calculation of the relative functions and averages would show up instances of partial decline at the bottom of the scale, and, at any event, a structural distortion throughout. There is no point constantly arguing that this is temporary or conjunctural when one sees the whole logic of the system sustaining it and the system indeed depending upon it for the fulfilment of its aims. At best, we can say the system stabilizes around a certain rate of distortion or, in other words, stabilizes, whatever the absolute volume of wealth, at a point which includes a systematic inequality. The only way, in fact, to escape the idealist dead-end of this gloomy listing of dysfunctions is to admit that there is a systematic logic at work The social logic of consumption 53 here. It is also the only way of getting beyond the false problematic of abundance and scarcity which, like votes of confidence in parliamentary circles, functions to stifle all discussion. There is not in fact - and never has been - any 'affluent society', any more than there is an 'indigent society', since every society of whatever kind and whatever the volume of goods produced or available wealth is geared both to a structural excess and a structural penury. The excess may be the portion set aside for the gods or for sacrifice; it may be sumptuary expenditure, surplus value, economic profit or prestige budgets. It is, at any rate, that luxury levy which defines both the wealth of a society and its social structure, since it is always the prerogative of a privileged minority and its function is precisely to reproduce caste or class privilege. At the sociological level there is no equilibrium. Equilib rium is the ideal fantasy of economists which is contradicted, if not by the very logic of society as a condition, then at least by all known forms of social organization. Every society produces differentiation, social discrimination, and that structural organization is based on the use and distribution of wealth (among other things). The fact that a society enters upon a phase of growth, as our industrial society has done, changes nothing in this process. Quite the contrary, indeed, in a certain way the capitalist system (and the productivist system in general) has been the culmination of that functional unlevelling, that disequilibrium, by ration alizing it and generalizing it in all respects. The spirals of growth are arrayed around the same structural axis. As soon as the fiction of GOP is abandoned as the criterion of affluence, we have to admit that growth neither takes us further from, nor brings us closer to, affluence. It is logically separated from it by the whole social structure which is, here, the determin ing instance. A certain type of social relations and social contradictions, a certain type of 'inequality', which used to perpetuate itself in the absence of economic progress, is today reproduced in and through growth.1 This means that we must take another view of growth. We shall no longer say with the enthusiasts: 'Growth produces affluence and there fore equality.' Nor shall we take the extreme opposite view: 'Growth produces inequality.' Overturning the false problem of whether growth is egalitarian or inegalitarian, we shall say that it is growth itself which is a function of inequality. It is the need of the inegalitarian social order - the social structure of privilege - to maintain itself that produces and reproduces growth as its strategic element. To put it yet another way, the internal autonomy of (technological, economic) growth is weak and secondary by comparison with that determination by the social structure. Growth society is, overall, the product of a compromise between egalitarian democratic principles, which for support within that society can draw on the myths of Affluence and Well-Being, and the funda mental imperative of maintaining an order of privilege and domination. 54 The theory of consumption That society is not founded on technological progress. It is that mechan istic view which fuels the naive illusion of future affluence. It is, rather, this contradictory dual determination which underpins the possibility of technological progress. It is this determination too which governs the emergence in our contemporary societies of certain egalitarian, demo cratic, 'progressive' processes. But it must be recognized that these only emerge there in homoeopathic doses, drip-fed out by the system to ensure its survival. In this systematic process, equality itself is a (secondary and derived) function of inequality. As is growth. The tendency for incomes to be equalized, for example (for it is chiefly at this level that the egalitarian myth operates), is necessary to the internalization of growth processes - an internalization which, as we have seen, contributes tactically to the reproduction of the social order, which is a structure of privilege and class power. All this points to the few symptoms of democratization as being alibis essential to the viability of the system. These few symptoms are, moreover, themselves superficial and sus pect. Galbraith rejoices at the decline in importance of inequality as an economic (and, hence, social) problem - not that it has disappeared, as he says, but because wealth no longer brings with it the fundamental advantages (power, enjoyment, prestige, distinction) it once implied. The power of property-owners and stockholders is at an end; it is now experts and organized technicians who exercise power, if not indeed intellectuals and scientists! The conspicuous consumption of the great capitalists, the 'Citizen Kanes', is over, and there are no great fortunes any more. Indeed, the rich feel almost duty-bound to underconsume. In short, without wishing to do so, Galbraith clearly shows that if there is equality (if poverty and wealth are no longer a problem), it is precisely because equality no longer has any real importance. Things have moved on; the criteria of value are now elsewhere. Social discrimination, power and so on - those things which remain the key factors - have been shifted away from income or wealth pure and simple. It is of little consequence, in these conditions, if all incomes are in the end equal; the system can even afford the luxury of making a great step in that direction, for the fundamental determination of 'inequality' is no longer to be found there. Knowledge, culture, the structures of responsibility and decision making, and influence are all criteria which, though still largely asso ciated with wealth and level of income, have to a great extent relegated these latter - together with external marks of status - in the order of the social determinants of value, in the hierarchy of criteria of 'power'. Galbraith, for example, confuses the 'underconsumption' of the rich with the abolition of criteria of prestige based on money. Now, admittedly, the rich man who drives a 2CV no longer bedazzles. What he does is more subtle: he super-differentiates himself, super-distinguishes himself by his manner of consuming, by style. He maintains his privilege absolutely by moving from conspicuous to discreet (super-conspicuous) consumption, The social logic of consumption 55 by moving from quantitative ostentation to distinction, from money to culture. In fact, even this argument, which we might term the thesis of the 'tendency of the rate of economic privilege to fall', is not certain. For money always transmutes itself into hierarchical privilege, into a privil ege of power and culture. We may accept that it is no longer decisive (has it ever been?). What Galbraith and the others fail to see is that the very fact that (economic) inequality is no longer a problem in itself constitutes a problem. Registering a little too hastily the abatement of the 'iron law' in the economic field, they then go no further, and fail to produce a broader theory of this 'iron law' or to see how it shifts from the field of incomes and 'consumption' - henceforth blessed by Affluence - to a much more general social field where, functioning more subtly, it makes itself all the more irreversible. The Industrial System and Poverty When one examines the problem of the industrial system objectively in its entirety, cutting through all the liturgy of growth and affluence, one sees that all the possible positions boil down to two fundamental options: 1 The Galbraith option (shared by so many others). This magical idealist position consists in expelling from the system all the negative phenomena - dysfunctions, nuisances, poverty - on the grounds that these are admittedly deplorable but accidental, residual and eventu ally remediable. In this way, the enchanted orbit of growth is preserved. 2 The view that the system survives on disequilibrium and structural penury, that its logic is totally ambivalent, and that it is so not merely conjuncturally but structurally. The system only sustains itself by producing wealth and poverty, by producing as many dissatisfactions as satisfactions, as much nuisance as 'progress'. Its only logic is to survive and its strategy in this regard is to keep human society out of kilter, in perpetual deficit. We know the system has traditionally and powerfully drawn on the aid of war to survive and to revive. Today the mechanisms and functions of war have been integrated into the economic system and the mechanisms of daily life. If one accepts this structural paradox of growth, from which the contra dictions and paradoxes of affluence derive, then it is naive and mystifica tory to confuse the logical processes of social underdevelopment with the poor, the 20 per cent of 'underprivileged', the individuals 'thrown on the scrapheap'. Those processes cannot be located in real persons, in real places, in real groups. By the same token, they cannot be eliminated by the billions of dollars which have been thrown at the lower classes, or by the massive redistribution programmes to 'dispel poverty' and provide equal life-chances (all this being got up as the 'new frontier? a social 56 The theory of consumption ideal to tug at the heart strings). We have to acknowledge at times that the 'great societists' themselves believe in all this, their bewilderment at the failure of their 'unremitting, generous' efforts being only the more comical for that fact. H poverty and nuisance cannot be eliminated, this is because they are anywhere but in the poor neighbourhoods. They are not in the slums or shanty-towns, but in the socio-economic structure. Yet this is precisely what has to be concealed, what must not be said, and indeed billions of dollars are spent on hiding the fact (in the same way, heavy medical and pharmaceutical expenditure may be necessary to avoid admitting that a problem is not what it appears to be, and may, for example, be psycho logical in nature - the well-known process of 'denial'). A society, like an individual, may ruin itself in this way, trying to escape analysis. Now, it is true here that analysis would be lethal for the system itself. So the sacrifice of useless millions in the struggle against what is merely the visible phantom of poverty is not too high a price to pay if it means that the myth of growth is preserved. We have to go even further and acknowledge that this real poverty is a myth - and one in which the myth of growth glories, pretending to battle fiercely against it and yet keeping it alive all the same as its secret goals require. Having said this, we should not believe that it is because they are deliberately bloodthirsty and odious that the industrial or capitalist sys tems continually regenerate poverty or identify with the arms race. Moralistic analysis (which neither liberals nor Marxists escape) is always a mistake. If the system could find an equilibrium or survive on foundations other than unemployment, underdevelopment and military expenditure, it would do so. And on occasion it does. When it can safely maintain its power by way of beneficial social effects, by way of 'affluence', it does not fail to do so. It is not opposed on principle to the social 'spin-offs' of progress. It takes both nuclear power and the well being of citizens as its objective, simultaneously and without distinction: the point is that, in its eyes, the two are ultimately equal as contents and its final goal lies elsewhere. The simple fact is that, at the strategic level, it turns out that military expenditures (for example) are more reliable, easier to monitor and more effective in achieving the survival and goals of the system as a whole than education - as is also the case with motor cars rather than hospitals, colour televisions rather than playgrounds, etc. But that negative dis crimination does not apply to public services as such. Things are much more serious than this: the system knows only the conditions of its survival, it knows nothing of social and individual contents. That should forearm us against a number of (typically social-reformist) illusions: the illusions which involve a belief that one can change the system by modifying its contents (transferring military expenditures to education etc.). Moreover, the paradox is that all these social demands are, slowly but surely, taken up and realized by the system itself, thus slipping through the fingers of The social logic of consumption 57 those who turn them into a political platform. Consumption, informa tion, communication, culture, affluence - all these things are today set in place, discovered and organized by the system itself, as new productive forces, for its greater glory. It too is changing over (relatively) from a violent to a non-violent structure: it is substituting affluence and con sumption for exploitation and war. But it will win no affection for this, since it is not actually changing, but merely obeying its own laws. The New Segregations Not only affluence, but nuisance too has been taken up into the social logic. The ascendancy of the urban and industrial milieu is producing new examples of shortage: shortages of space and time, fresh air, greenery, water, silence. Certain goods, which were once free and abund antly available, are becoming luxuries accessible only to the privileged, while manufactured goods or services are offered on a mass scale. The relative homogenization at the level of essential goods is thus being accompanied by a 'slippage' of values and a new hierarchy of utilities. The distortion and inequality are not reduced; they are trans ferred elsewhere. Everyday consumer objects are becoming less and less expressive of social rank. And incomes themselves, in so far as the great disparities are being reduced, are losing their value as a distinctive criterion. It is even possible that consumption (taken in the sense of expenditure, of the purchase and possession of visible objects) will gradually concede to other criteria and other types of behaviour the pre eminent role it currently plays in the variable geometry of status. Ultimately, it will become the prerogative of everyone when it no longer has any meaning. We are already seeing the social hierarchy being registered in more subtle criteria: type of work and responsibility, level of education and culture (the way of consuming everyday goods may itself be a kind of 'scarce commodity'), participation in decision-making. Knowledge and power are, or are going to become, the two great scarce commodities of our affluent societies. But these abstract criteria do not prevent us, even today, from reading a growing discrimination in other concrete signs. Segregation by place of residence is not new, but, being increasingly linked to a consciously induced shortage and chronic speculation, it is tending to become decisive, in terms of both geographical segregation (town centres and outskirts, residential zones, rich ghettos, dormitory suburbs, etc.) and habitable space (the inside and outside of the dwelling, the addition of a 'second home', etc.). Objects are less important today than space and the social marking of space. Habitat thus perhaps has an opposite function to that of other consumables. The latter have a homogenizing function, the former a differentiating function in terms of space and location. 58 The theory of consumption Nature, space, clean air, silence - it is the incidence of the pursuit of these scarce commodities and their high price which we read in the differential indices of expenditure between two categories at opposite ends of the social spectrum. The difference in expenditure between workers and senior managers on essential goods is 100:135, but it is 100:245 on household equipment, 100:305 on transport and 100:390 on leisure. One should not see these figures as showing a quantitative graduation within a homogeneous space of consumption, but see, through them, the social discrimination attaching to the quality of goods sought after. There is much talk of the right to health, to space, to beauty, to holidays, to knowledge and to culture. And, as these new rights emerge, so ministries emerge with them, such as the Ministries of Health, or of Leisure. And why not add Beauty and Clean Air? This whole phenom enon, which seems to express a general individual and collective advance, rewarded in the end with embodiment in institutions, is ambiguous in its meaning and one might, as it were, see it as represent ing quite the opposite: there is no right to space until there no longer is space for everyone, and until space and silence are the privilege of some at the expense of others. Just as there was no 'right to property' until there was no longer land for everyone and there was no right to work until work became, within the framework of the division of labour, an exchangeable commodity, i.e. one which no longer belonged specifically to individuals. We might ask whether the 'right to leisure' does not, similarly, mean that leisure too has reached the stage of technical and social division which work did before it and has thus, in fact, come to an end. The appearance of these new social rights, brandished as slogans and emblazoned on the democratic banner of the affluent society, is in fact symptomatic, therefore, of the elements concerned acquiring the status of distinctive signs and class (or caste) privileges. The 'right to clean air' signifies the loss of clean air as a natural good, its transition to commodity status and its inegalitarian social redistribution. One should not mistake for objective social progress (something being entered as a right in the tables of the law) what is simply the advance of the capitalist system - i.e. the progressive transformation of all concrete and natural values into productive forms, i.e. into sources 1 of economic profit; 2 of social privilege. A Class Institution Consumption no more homogenizes the social body than the educational system homogenizes cultural opportunities. It even highlights the disparities within it. One is tempted to regard consumption and the The social logic of consumption 59 growing participation in the same(?) goods and the same(?) products, both material and cultural, as a corrective to social disparities, social hierarchy and the ever increasing level of discrimination where power and responsibilities are concerned. In fact, the ideology of consumption, like that of education (i.e. the representation one has of a total equality before the electric razor or the car, like the representation one has of a total equality before writing and reading), does indeed play this role. Everyone today can read and write; everyone has (or will have) the same washing machine and buys the same paperbacks. But this equality is entirely formal: though bearing on what is most concrete, it is in fact abstract. And it is, by contrast, on this homogeneous abstract base, on this foundation of the abstract democracy of spelling or the TV set, that the real system of discrimination is able to operate - and to operate all the more effectively. In actual fact, it is not even true that consumer products, the signs of this social institution, establish this primary democratic platform: for, in themselves, and taken individually (the car, the razor, etc.), they have no meaning: it is their constellation, their configuration, the relation to these objects and their overall social 'perspective' which alone have a meaning. And that meaning is always a distinctive one. They them selves, in their materiality as signs (their subtle differences), reflect that structural determination. Like education, they obey the same social logic as other institutions, even in the inverted image they give of that logic. Consumption, like the education system, is a class institution: not only is there inequality before objects in the economic sense (the purchase, choice and use of objects are governed by purchasing power and by educational level, which is itself dependent upon class background, etc.) - in short, not everyone has the same objects, just as not everyone has the same educational chances - but, more deeply, there is radical discrimina tion in the sense that only some people achieve mastery of an autonom ous, rational logic of the elements of the environment (functional use, aesthetic organization, cultural accomplishment). Such people do not really deal with objects and do not, strictly speaking, 'consume', whilst the others are condemned to a magical economy, to the valor ization of objects as such, and of all other things as objects (ideas, leisure, knowledge, culture): this fetishistic logic is, strictly, the ideology of consumption. Similarly, for those who do not have the key to them - that is to say, the code which admits one to their legitimate, rational and effective use - knowledge and culture are merely the occasion of a sharper, subtler cultural segregation, since knowledge and culture merely appear in their eyes, and in the use they make of them, as a supplementary mana, a reserve of magic power, instead of being the opposite: a learning process and an objective training.3 60 The theory of consumption A Salvational Dimension By their number, redundancy, superfluity and formal extravagance, by the play of fashion and all that exceeds pure and simple function in them, objects merely simulate the social essence - status - that grace of predestination which is only ever bestowed by birth to a few and which the majority, having opposite destinies, can never attain. This hereditary legitimacy (whether of blood or of culture) is at the very heart of the concept of status, the key concept in the whole dynamics of social mobility. Underlying all aspirations, there is this ideal end of a status by birth, a status of grace and excellence. And status also haunts the environment of objects. It is status which arouses this frenzy, this berserk world of knick-knacks, gadgets, fetishes, all of which seek to mark out a value for all eternity and prove salvation by works, since salvation by grace is unattainable. Hence the very particular prestige of the ancient object, which is a sign of heredity, of innate value, of irreversible grace. It is a class logic which imposes salvation by objects. That is a salvation by works, which, in its 'democratic' nature, stands opposed to the aristocratic principle of salvation by grace and election. Now, in the universal consensus, salvation by grace always wins out over salvation by works. This is to some degree what we see among the lower and middle classes, where 'proving oneself by objects' - salvation by con sumption - in its endless process of moral demonstration, battles despairingly to attain a status of personal grace, of god-givenness and predestination. That remains, nonetheless, the preserve of the upper classes, who prove their excellence elsewhere, in the display of their culture and the exercise of their power. Differentiation and Growth Society All this leads us, then, beyond the Metaphysics of Needs and Affluence, to a genuine analysis of the social logic of consumption. That logic is by no means that of the individual appropriation of the use-value of goods and services - a logic of unequal abundance, some having rightful access to the miracle, others merely to the by-products of the miracle. It is a logic not of satisfaction, but of the production and manipulation of social signifiers. The process of consumption may be analysed within this perspective from two basic angles: 1 As a process of signification and communication, based on a code into which consumption practices fit and from which they derive their meaning. Consumption here is a system of exchange, and the equivalent of a language. Structural analysis is the appropriate approach at this level. We shall come back to this below. 2 As a process of classification and social differentiation in which sign/ objects are ordered not now merely as significant differences in a code The social logic of consumption 61 but as status values in a hierarchy. Here consumption can be sub mitted to a strategic analysis which determines its specific import ance in the distribution of status values (overlapping with other social signifiers: knowledge, power, culture, etc.). The principle of analysis remains as follows: you never consume the object in itself (in its use-value); you are always manipulating objects (in the broadest sense) as signs which distinguish you either by affiliating you to your own group taken as an ideal reference or by marking you off from your group by reference to a group of higher status. Yet, this process of status differentiation, which is a fundamental social process by which everyone takes their place within society, has a lived aspect and a structural aspect, the one conscious, the other unconscious, the one ethical (the morality of social standing, of status rivalry, of the ladder of prestige), the other structural. One is permanently governed by a code whose rules and meaning-constraints - like those of language - are, for the most part, beyond the grasp of individuals. The consumer experiences his distinctive behaviours as freedom, as aspiration, as choice. His experience is not one of being forced to be different, of obeying a code. To differentiate oneself is always, by the same token, to bring into play the total order of differences, which is, from the first, the product of the total society and inevitably exceeds the scope of the individual. In the very act of scoring his points in the order of differences, each individual maintains that order, and therefore con demns himself only ever to occupy a relative position within it. Each individual experiences his differential social gains as absolute gains; he does not experience the structural constraint which means that positions change, but the order of differences remains. Yet it is this constraint of relativity which is crucial, in so far as it is with reference to this that the differential occupation of positions will never end. It alone can account for the fundamental character of consumption, its unlimited character, a dimension which cannot be explained by any theory of needs and satisfaction, since, if the calculation were made in terms of a calorific or energy balance sheet or of use-values, a saturation point would very soon be reached. But we very clearly see the opposite happening: an acceleration of the rate of consumption, increased pressure on demand, which means that the gap between a giant-scale productivity and an even more frantic propensity to consume is, in fact, growing wider (meanwhile, affluence, understood as the harmonious matching of the two, recedes indefinitely). This can only be explained if we radically abandon the individual logic of satisfaction and accord the social logic of differentiation the decisive importance it deserves. And if we distinguish that logic of difference from mere conscious determina tions of prestige, since these latter are still satisfactions, the consumption of positive differences, whereas the sign or mark of distinction is always both a positive and a negative difference - this is why it refers on 62 The theory of consumption indefinitely to other signs and impels the consumer on to definitive dissatisfaction.4 The alarm of economists and other idealist theorists of well-being at the clear inability of the consumption system to stabilize - at its uncontrolled, runaway character - is always very instructive. It is characteristic of their way of seeing things in terms of increases in goods and incomes - and never in terms of relation and differentiation by signs. Thus Gervasi writes: 'Growth is accompanied by the constant introduc tion of new products as the rise in incomes expands the scope for consumption.' 'The rising trend of incomes brings not only a wave of new products, but also a proliferation of different qualities for the same product.' (Why? What is the logical relation?) 'The rise in incomes leads to a progressive improvement in quality.' We have here again the same implicit thesis: 'The more you earn, the more you want, and better ', this being true of everyone individually, without distinction, each person seeking a rational optimum of well-being. Very generally, moreover, the field of consumption is a homogeneous one for them (with, at most, some disparities of income or 'cultural' disparities in it), which fans out statistically around an average type: the 'consumer '. This is a view induced by the conception of American society as an immense middle class - and European sociology has now, largely, fallen in with that view. In fact, the field of consumption is a structured social field, where not only goods, but needs themselves, like the various cultural characteristics, pass from a key group, a leading elite, to the other social categories as these 'rise' relatively on the social ladder. There is no 'mass of consumers' and no need emerges spontan eously from the grassroots consumer: needs have no chance of appearing in the 'standard package' of needs if they have not already been part of the 'select package'. The path of needs, like the path of objects and goods, is thus first socially selective: needs and satisfactions trickle down in accordance with an absolute principle, a kind of social categorical imperative which is the maintenance of distance and of differentiation by signs. It is this law which conditions all introduction of new objects as distinctive social material. It is this law of the 'top-down' replenishment of distinctive material which runs through the whole world of consump tion, not the rise in incomes, which runs in the opposite direction (from the bottom up, towards total homogeneity). No product has any chance of being mass-produced, no need has any chance of being satisfied on a mass scale unless it has already ceased to form part of the higher model and has been replaced by some other distinctive good or need - such that the distance is preserved. Popular ization occurs only as a function of selective innovation at the top. And that process occurs, of course, as a function of the 'falling rate of distinction' of objects and goods in a growth society. Here again some preconceptions are in need of revision: popularization has its own mechanics (the mass media, etc.), but it has no logic of its own regarding The social logic of consumption 63 content. It is within the upper echelons of society, as a reaction against the loss of earlier distinctive markers, that innovation takes place, in order to restore social distance. As a result, the needs of the middle and lower classes are always, like objects, subject to a certain backwardness; they lag temporally and culturally behind the needs of the upper classes. This is a not insignificant form of segregation in so-called democratic society. One of the contradictions of growth is that it produces goods and needs at the same time, but does not produce them at the same rate - the rate of production of goods being dependent on industrial and economic productivity, the rate of production of needs on the logic of social differentiation. Now, the upward and irreversible mobility of the needs 'set free' by growth (i.e. produced by the industrial system as it obeys its internal logical constraints)5 has its own dynamic, which is different from the dynamic of the production of the material and cultural goods supposedly meant to satisfy those needs. Beyond a certain level of urban socialization, status competition and psychological 'take-off, aspiration is irreversible and unlimited, and develops to a rhythm of accelerated socio-differentiation and generalized interrelativity. Hence the specific problems linked to this 'differential' dynamic of consumption. If aspira tions were simply concurrent with productivity, subordinate to it, there would be no problem. In fact, by their very own logic, which is a logic of difference, they constitute an uncontrollable variable. They are not just another variable in the economic calculation - a socio-cultural variable of situation or context - but a crucial structural variable which governs all others. We must, admittedly, accept (as the various studies on this point, particularly on cultural needs, have done) a certain sociological inertia of needs. In other words, a certain indexing of needs and aspirations to the social position achieved (and not in the least, as conditioning theorists believe, to the goods on offer). Once again at this level, we find the same processes which are those of social mobility. A certain 'realism' means that people in a particular social situation never have aspirations much beyond what they can reasonably hope to attain. By having aspirations a little beyond their objective chances, they internalize the official norms of a growth society. By having aspirations which are little beyond, they internalize the real norms of expansion of that society (Malthusian even in its expansion) which are always short of what is possible. The less one has, the lower one's aspirations (at least up to a certain threshold, where total unrealism takes over to compensate for destitution). Thus, the very process of the production of aspirations is inegalitarian, since resignation at the bottom end of the social scale and freer aspirations at the top compound the inequality of objective possibilities of satisfaction. Here again, however, the problem must be seen in the round: it is quite possible that strictly consumer aspirations (material and cultural) - which, for their part, display a much greater degree of elasticity than 64 The theory of consumption professional or cultural aspirations - in fact compensate for the serious underachievement of certain classes in terms of social mobility. The compulsion to consume might be said to compensate for failure to rise up the vertical social ladder. At the same time as expressing a status demand, the aspirations to 'overconsume' (on the part of the lower classes in particular) might be seen as expressing the felt failure of that demand. The fact remains that needs and aspirations, activated by social differentiation and demands for status, tend in a growth society always to progress a little more quickly than available goods or objective chances. Moreover, the industrial system itself, which presupposes the growth of needs, also presupposes a perpetual excess of needs over the supply of goods (in the same way as it speculates on a reserve of unemployment to maximize the profit it extracts from labour power: we meet here once again the deep-level analogy between needs and pro ductive forces).6 Speculating upon this discrepancy between goods and needs, the system does, however, verge on a contradiction in that growth not only implies the growth of needs and a certain disequilibrium between goods and needs, but further implies the growth of that very disequilibrium between the growth of needs and the growth of productiv ity. Hence the 'psychological pauperization' and the chronic, latent state of crisis, which is itself functionally linked to growth, but which can lead to a point of breakdown, an explosive contradiction. Confronting the growth of needs and the growth of production means bringing out the decisive 'intermediate' variable that is differentiation. Hence, it is the increasing differentiation of products and the increasing differentiation of the social demand for prestige that must be seen in their interrelations? Now, the former is limited, whereas the latter is not. There are no limits to man's 'needs' as a social being (i.e. as a being productive of meaning and relative to others in value). The quantitative intake of food is limited, the digestive system is limited, but the cultural system of food is, for its part, indefinite. And it is, moreover, a relatively contingent system. The strategic value of advertising - and also its trick - is precisely this: that it targets everyone in their relation to others, in their hankerings after reified social prestige. It is never addressed to a lone individual, but is aimed at human beings in their differential relations and, even when it seems to tap into their 'deep' motivations, it always does so in spectacular fashion. That is to say, it always calls in their friends and relations, the group, and society, all hierarchically ordered within the process of reading and interpretation, the process of 'setting off' or 'showing-off' [faire-valoir] which it sets in train. In a small group, needs, like competition, can doubtless stabilize. There is less of an escalation in the signifiers of status and the stuff of distinction. We can see this in traditional societies or micro-groups. But, in a society of industrial and urban concentration such as our own, where people are crowded together at much greater levels of density, the The social logic of consumption 65 demand for differentiation grows even more quickly than material productivity. When the whole social world becomes urbanized, when communication becomes total, 'needs' grow exponentially - not from the growth of appetite, but from competition. That escalation, that differential 'chain reaction', sanctioned by the total dictatorship of fashion, has the urban space as its locus. (And, reciprocally, the process reinforces urban concentration by rapid accul turation of the rural or marginal areas. It is, therefore, irreversible. Any vague desire to halt it is naIve.) Human density in itself exerts a fascination. But the language of cities is competition itself. Motives, desires, encounters, stimuli, the endless judgements of others, continual eroticization, information, the appeals of advertising: all these things make up a kind of abstract destiny of collective participation, set against a real background of generalized competition. Just as industrial concentration results in an ever increased production of goods, so urban concentration results in a limitless promotion of needs. Now, though the two types of concentration are contempor aneous, they nonetheless have their own dynamics, as we have seen, and their results do not coincide. Urban concentration (and hence differ entiation) outstrips productivity. That is the basis of urban alienation. A neurotic equilibrium does, however, establish itself in the end, somewhat to the advantage of the more coherent order of production - the proliferation of needs washing back over the order of products, and becoming integrated into it after a fashion. All this defines the growth society as the opposite of an affluent society. Thanks to this constant tension between competitive needs and produc tion, thanks to this shortage-based tension, to this 'psychological pauper ization', the order of production manages only to give rise to - and only to 'satisfy' - the needs appropriate to it. In the growth-based order, there are, by this logic, no autonomous needs and there cannot be any. There are only the needs of growth. There is no place for individual goals in the system; there is room only for the goals of the system. All the dysfunc tions pointed out by Galbraith, Bertrand de Jouvenel, etc., are logical. It is reasonably clear that cars and motorways are a need of the system, but so is the university training of middle managers. Hence the 'democrat ization' of the university is as much a systemic need as car production.8 Because the system produces only for its own needs, it is all the readier systematically to hide behind the alibi of individual needs. Hence the gigantic growth of private consumption by comparison with public services (Galbraith). This is no accident. The cult of individual spon taneity and the naturalness of needs is, by its nature, father to the productivist option. Even the most 'rational' needs (education, culture, health, transport, leisure), cut off from their real collective significance, are taken up, in the same way as the incidental needs deriving from growth, into the systematic future perspectives of that growth. 66 The theory of consumption Furthermore, it is in an even deeper sense that growth society is the opposite of an affluent society. Before being a society productive of goods, it is in fact a society productive of privileges. Now, there is a necessary, sociologically definable relationship between privilege and penury. There could not (in any society whatever) be privilege without penury. The two are structurally linked. Growth is, therefore, by its social logic, paradoxically defined by the reproduction of a structural penury. That penury no longer has the same sense as primary penury (a dearth of goods): that could be regarded as provisional and it is, in part, overcome in our societies, but the structural penury which substitutes for it is definitive since it is systematized as a booster function and power strategy in the very logic of the order of growth. In conclusion, we shall state that there is, at any event, a logical contradiction between the ideological hypothesis of growth society, which is social homogenization at the highest level, and its concrete social logic, based on a structural differentiation - this logically contra dictory whole forming the basis of an overall strategy. And, lastly, we shall once again stress the major illusion, the cardinal myth of this false affluent society: the illusion of distribution on the idealist pattern of 'communicating vessels'. The flow of goods and products does not find its level like the sea. Social inertia, unlike natural inertia, does not lead to a state of distortion, disparity and privilege. Growth is not democracy. Profusion is a function of discrimination. How could it be the corrective to it? The Palaeolithic, or the First Affluent Society We must abandon the received idea we have of an affluent society as a society in which all material (and cultural) needs are easily met, for that leaves all social logic out of account. We should rather espouse the notion recently propounded by Marshall Sahlins in his article on the first affluent society, that it is our industrial and productivist societies which, unlike certain primitive societies, are dominated by scarcity, by the obses sion with scarcity characteristic of the market economy.9 The more one produces, the more clearly does one show up, amidst plenty, how irremediably far off is that final point which affluence would represent, defined as an equilibrium between human production and human goals. Since what is satisfied in a growth society, and increasingly satisfied as productivity grows, are the very needs of the order of production, not the 'needs' of man (the whole system depends indeed on these being misrecognized), it is clear that affluence recedes indefinitely: more precisely, it is irrevocably rejected and the organized reign of scarcity (structural penury) preferred. For Sahlins, it was the hunter-gatherers (the primitive nomadic tribes of Australia, the Kalahari, etc.) who, in spite of their absolute 'poverty', The social logic of consumption 67 knew true affluence. The primitive people of those societies have no personal possessions; they are not obsessed by their objects, which they throw away as and when they need to in order to be able to move about more easily. They have no apparatus of production, or 'work': they hunt and gather 'at their leisure', as we might say, and share everything within the group. They are entirely prodigal: they consume everything immediately, make no economic calculations and amass no stores. The hunter-gatherer has nothing of that bourgeois invention, economic man, about him. He is ignorant of the basic principles of Political Economy. And, indeed, he never exploits human energies, natural resources or the effective economic possibilities to the full. He sleeps a lot. He has a trust - and this is what characterizes his economic system - in the wealth of natural resources, whereas our system is characterized (ever more so with technical advance) by despair at the insufficiency of human means, by a radical, catastrophic anxiety which is the deep effect of the market economy and generalized competition. The collective 'improvidence' and 'prodigality' characteristic of prim itive societies are the sign of real affluence. We have only the signs of affluence. Beneath a gigantic apparatus of production, we anxiously eye the signs of poverty and scarcity. But poverty consists, says Sahlins, neither in a small quantity of goods, nor simply in a relation between ends and means: it is, above all, a relation between human beings. The basis for the confidence of primitive peoples and for the fact that, within hunger, they live a life of plenty, is ultimately the transparency and reciprocity of social relations. It is the fact that no monopolization whatever of nature, the soil, the instruments or products of 'labour ' intervenes to obstruct exchange and institute scarcity. There is among them no accumulation, which is always the source of power. In the economy of the gift and symbolic exchange, a small and always finite quantity of goods is sufficient to create general wealth since those goods pass constantly from one person to the other. Wealth has its basis not in goods, but in the concrete exchange between persons. It is, therefore, unlimited since the cycle of exchange is endless, even among a limited number of individuals, with each moment of the exchange cycle adding to the value of the object exchanged. It is this concrete and relational dialectic which we find inverted, as a dialectic of penury and unlimited need, in the process of competition and differentiation characteristic of our civilized, industrial societies. Where, in primitive exchange, every relationship adds to the social wealth, in our 'differential' societies every social relationship adds to individual lack, since every thing possessed is relativized in relation to others (in primitive exchange, it is valorized by the very relationship with others). It is not, therefore, paradoxical to argue that in our 'affluent' societies abundance is lost and that it will not be restored by an interminable increase in productivity, by unleashing new productive forces. Since the structural definition of abundance and wealth lies in social organization, 68 The theory of consumption only a revolution of the social organization and of social relations could bring those things about. Will we return, one day, beyond the market economy, to prodigality? Instead of prodigality, we have 'consumption', forced consumption in perpetuity, twin sister to scarcity. It was social logic which brought primitive peoples the 'first' (and only) affluent society. It is our social logic which condemns us to luxurious and spectacular penury. 5 Towards a T heory of Consumption The Autopsy of Homo oeconomicus A fairy story: 'Once upon a time there was a Man who lived in Scarcity. After many adventures and a long journey through Economic Science, he met the Affluent Society. They married and had lots of needs.' 'The beauty of the economic man,' as A.N. Whitehead remarked, 'was that we knew exactly what he was after.'l That human fossil of the Golden Age, born, in the modern era, from the happy union of Human Nature and Human Rights, is endowed with a heightened sense of formal rationality, which leads him to: 1 seek his own happiness without the slightest hesitation; 2 prefer objects which will provide him with the greatest satisfactions. The whole discourse, lay and academic, on consumption is articulated upon this sequence, which is the mythological sequence of a folk-tale: a Man 'endowed' with wants or needs which 'lead' him towards objects which 'give' him satisfaction. Since man is, nonetheless, never satisfied (he is, indeed, criticized for this), the same story begins over and over again, with the sterile self-evidence of old fables. Some react with perplexity: 'Needs are the most stubbornly unknown of all the unknowns with which economic science deals' (Knight). But this doubt does not stop the litany on needs being faithfully recited by all the proponents of the anthropological disciplines from Marx to Galbraith, from Robinson Crusoe to Chombart de Lauwe. For econom ists, the key term is 'utility': the desire for a specific good for purposes of consumption or, in other words, the destruction of its utility. Need is therefore already given its object (finalise] by the available goods; prefer ences are orientated by the particular spread of products offered on the market: this is, basically, effective demand. For the psychologist, the key idea is 'motivation', a slightly more complex theory, less 'object-oriented' and more 'instinct-oriented', of a kind of pre-existent, ill-defined neces sity. For sociologists and psycho-sociologists who come last in line, there is a 'socio-cultural' dimension here. The anthropological postulate of an individual endowed with needs and inclined by nature to satisfy them is not questioned, nor is that of the consumer as a free, conscious being who is presumed to know what he wants (sociologists are wary of 'deep motivations'), but on the basis of this idealist postulate it is accepted that 70 The theory of consumption there is a 'social dynamic' of needs. Models of competition and con formity are brought in ('keeping up with the Joneses') drawn from the group context or from grand 'cultural models' relating to society at large or to history. Roughly speaking, three positions can be identified: for Marshall, needs are interdependent and rational; for Galbraith (we shall come back to him), choices are imposed by persuasion; for Gervasi (and others), needs are interdependent and are the product of a learning process (rather than a rational calculation) . Gervasi: 'Choices are not made at random, but are socially controlled and reflect the cultural model within which they are made. It is not just any old goods which are produced or consumed: they must have some meaning with regard to a system of values. ' This leads into a view of consumption in terms of integration: 'The goal of the economy is not the maximization of production for the individual, but the maximization of production linked in with the value system of the society' (Parsons). Duesenberry will claim, in this same vein, that the only choice is, in fact, to vary one's possessions as a function of one's position on the hierarch ical ladder. Ultimately, it is the difference of choices between one society and another and the similarity of choices within the same society which force us to consider consumer behaviour as a social phenomenon. There is an appreciable difference between this view and that of the econom ists: their 'rational' choice has here become conformist choice, the choice of conformity. Needs are directed not so much towards objects as towards values, and their satisfaction initially has the sense of signing up to those values. The fundamental, unconscious, automatic choice of the consumer is to accept the style of life of a particular society (it is, therefore, no longer a choice(!) and the theory of the autonomy and sovereignty of the consumer is refuted). This sociology culminates in the notion of the 'standard package', defined by Riesman as the set of goods and services which forms more or less the baseline heritage of the average American. Rising regularly, indexed to the national standard of living, it is an ideal minimum of a statistical kind, a standard model of middle-class life. Exceeded by some, only dreamt of by others, it is an idea in which the American way of life is encapsulated.2 Here again, the 'standard package' refers not so much to the materiality of goods (TV, bathroom, car, etc.) as to the ideal of conformity. All this sociology does not advance us very much. Apart from the fact that the notion of conformity has never been anything but a cover for an immense tautology (in this case: the average American defined by the 'standard package', which is itself defined by the statistical average of goods consumed. Or, to put it sociologically, a particular individual is a member of a particular group because he consumes particular goods, and he consumes particular goods because he is a member of a particular group). The postulate of formal rationality we have seen at work among Towards a theory of consumption 71 economists is simply transferred here to the relation between the individ ual and the group. Conformity and satisfaction are analogous: they involve the same matching-up of a subject to objects, or a subject to a group - these terms being posited as separate entities - by means of a logical principle of equivalence. The concepts of 'need' and 'norm' are the expressions in the respective cases of this miraculous matc -up. Between the 'utility' of the economists and the 'conformity' of the sociologists, there is the same difference as Galbraith establishes between the pursuit of profit, the pecuniary motivation characteristic of the 'traditional' capitalist system, and the behaviour of identification and adaptation specific to the era of organization and the technostructure. The basic question which results, both for the psycho-sociologists of conformity and for Galbraith, and which (with good reason) does not arise for the economists - for whom the consumer remains an individual ideally free in his final, rational calculation - is that of the conditioning of needs. Since Packard's The Hidden Persuaders and Dichter 's The Strategy of Desire (not to mention a number of other works), the conditioning of needs (by advertising in particular) has become the favourite theme in the discussion of the consumer society. The celebration of affluence and the great lament over 'artificial' or 'alienated' needs are the two central strands in a single mass culture - and even in the social-scientific ideology on the question. This latter is generally rooted in an old moral and social philosophy deriving from the humanist tradition. In the case of Galbraith, it is based on more rigorous economic and political think ing. We shall therefore concentrate here on two of his works: The Affluent Society and The New Industrial State. Summarizing his position, we may say that the basic problem of contemporary capitalism is no longer the contradiction between 'profit maximization' and the 'rationalization of production' (from the point of view of the entrepreneur), but that between a potentially unlimited productivity (at the level of the technostructure) and the need to dispose of the product. It becomes vital for the system in this phase to control not just the apparatus of production, but consumer demand; to control not just prices, but what will be demanded at those prices. The 'general effect' - either prior to the act of production (surveys, market research) or subsequent to it (advertising, marketing, packaging) - is to 'shift the locus of decision in the purchase of goods from the consumer where it is beyond control to the firm where it is subject to control'.3 More generally, 'the accommodation of the market behaviour of the individual, as well as of social attitudes in general, to the needs of producers and the goals of the technostructure is an inherent feature of the system [it would be more appropriate to say: a logical feature]. It becomes increasingly important with the growth of the industrial system.'4 This is what Galbraith calls the 'revised sequence', as opposed to the 'accepted sequence', where the initiative is supposed to lie with the consumer and 72 The theory of consumption to impact back, through the market, on the manufacturers. In this new case, by contrast, the manufacturers control market behaviour, and guide and model social attitudes and needs. This is, at least tendentially, the total dictatorship of the order of production. This 'revised sequence' destroys the fundamental myth of the 'accepted sequence' (it has at least that critical value) : namely, that it is the individual who exercises power in the economic system. That emphasis on the power of the individual contributed largely to legitimat ing organization: all the dysfunctions, nuisances and inherent contra dictions of the order of production are justified since they extend the scope of consumer sovereignty. It is clear, by contrast, that the whole economic and psycho-sociological apparatus of market research, motiva tional studies, etc., which, it is claimed, ensures that real demand and the deep wants of the consumer govern the market, exists solely to stimulate that demand in order to create further outlets for products while constantly masking this objective process by staging its opposite. 'Man only became an object of science for man when automobiles became harder to sell than to manufacture.' So Galbraith everywhere denounces the boosting of demand by those 'artificial accelerators' the technostructure deploys in its imperialist expansion, accelerators which render any stabilization of demand impos sible.s Income, prestige purchases and surplus labour form a frantic vicious circle, the infernal round of consumption based on the celebra tion of so-called 'psychological' needs. These are differentiated from 'physiological' needs by apparently being based on 'discretionary income' and freedom of choice; they can thus be ruthlessly manipulated. Advertising clearly plays a crucial role here (this, too, has become a conventional idea). It seems attuned to the needs of the individual and to products. In fact, says Galbraith, it is attuned to the industrial system: 'It appears to place a significance on products only in so far as it is important for the system, and it upholds the importance and prestige of the technostructure from the social point of view.' Through advertis ing, the system appropriates social objectives for its own gain, and imposes its own goals as social objectives: 'What's good for General Motors . . . ' . Once again, one can only agree with Galbraith (and others) that the freedom and sovereignty of the consumer are mystification pure and simple. This carefully sustained mystique (preserved first and foremost by economists) of individual satisfaction and choice, which is the cul mination of a whole civilization of 'freedom', is the very ideology of the industrial system, justifying its arbitrary power and all the collective nuisances it generates: dirt, pollution, deculturation. In fact, the con sumer is sovereign in a jungle of ugliness where freedom of choice has been forced upon him. The revised sequence (that is to say, the system of consumption) thus ideologically complements and continues the work of Towards a theory of consumption 73 the electoral system. The drugstore and the polling booth, the loci of individual freedom, are also the system's two mammary glands. We have set out at length this analysis of the 'technostructural' conditioning of needs and consumption because it is all-powerful today, because it constitutes, thematized as it is in every way in the pseudo philosophy of 'alienation', a genuine collective representation which is itself part of consumption. But it is open to some fundamental objec tions, all of which relate to its idealist anthropological postulates. For Galbraith, the needs of the individual can be stabilized. There is in the nature of Man something like an economic principle which would make him impose limits on his objectives and needs and, at the same time, on his efforts, were it not for the action of 'artificial accelerators'. In short, a tendency to a - not now maximal, but 'harmonious' - satisfaction, a satisfaction that is balanced at the individual level and which - rather than getting caught up in the vicious circle of excessive gratifications described above - should be able to articulate itself on a social organiza tion of collective needs which is also harmonious. All this is completely utopian. 1 On the principle of 'authentic' or 'artificial' satisfactions, Galbraith rails against the 'specious' reasoning of the economists: 'There is no proof that an expensive woman obtains the same satisfaction from yet another gown as does a hungry man from a hamburger. But there is no proof that she does not. Since it cannot be proven that she does not, her desire, it is held, must be accorded equal standing with that of a poor man for meat.'6 'Absurd,' says Galbraith. But, it is not absurd at all (here the classical economists are almost right to disagree with him - but, in fact, they take their stand in establishing this equivalence on the terrain of effective demand and thus sidestep all the problems). It is nonetheless true that, from the point of view of the consumer 's own satisfaction, there is no basis on which to decide what is 'factitious' and what is not. The enjoyment of TV or of a second home is experienced as 'true' freedom; no one experiences these things as an alienation. Only an intellectual can say such a thing, from the depths of his moralizing idealism, but this at most marks him out as being, for his part, an alienated moralist. 2 On the 'economic principle', Galbraith says: 'What is called eco nomic development consists in no small part in devising strategies to overcome the tendency of men to place limits on their objectives as regards income and thus on their efforts.1? And he cites the example of Filipino workers in California: 'The pressure of debt, and the pressure on each to emulate the most extravagant, quickly converted these happy and easygoing people into a modern and reliable work force.'s And all the underdeveloped countries, where the appearance of Western gadgets is the most reliable spur to economic growth. This theory, which we might term the theory of 'pressurizing' or economic training in con sumption, linked to pressurized economic growth, is seductive. It shows 74 The theory of consumption up forced acculturation to the processes of consumption as the logical next stage in the development of the industrial system, following on from the nineteenth century when workers were trained in the processes of industrial production (timekeeping, disciplined action).9 Having said this, we would have to explain why consumers 'take' the bait, why they are vulnerable to this strategy. It is too easy to appeal to a 'happy and easygoing' nature and to impute a mechanical responsibility to the system. There is no more a 'natural' tendency to be easygoing than there is to pressurized working. What Galbraith does not see - and this forces him to present individuals as mere passive victims of the system - is the whole social logic of differentiation, the distinguishing processes of class or caste which are fundamental to the social structure and are given free rein in 'democratic' society. In short, there is a whole sociological dimension of difference, status, etc., lacking here, in consequence of which all needs are reorganized around an objective social demand for signs and differences, a dimension no longer grounding consumption as a function of 'harmonious' individual satisfaction (which might thus be limited in terms of the ideal norms of 'nature'), but as an unlimited social activity. We shall come back to this point later. 3 'Needs are in reality the fruits of production,' says Galbraith, not realizing just how right he is. For, beneath its demystified, lucid air, this thesis, as he understands it, is merely a more subtle version of the natural 'authenticity' of certain needs, and bewitchment by the 'artificial'. Galbraith means that, without the productivist system, a great number of needs would not exist. He means that by producing particular goods and services, companies at the same time produce all the means of suggestion tailored to gaining acceptance for them and therefore, ulti mately, 'produce' the needs which correspond to them. There is a serious psychological lacuna in this conception. Needs are closely specified in advance here in relation to finite objects. The need is simply a need for a particular object, and the consumer 's psyche is, ultimately, just a shop window or a catalogue. It is true also that, taking this simplistic view of human beings, one cannot but arrive at a crushing psychological reduc tion in which empirical needs are mirror-reflections of empirical objects. Now, at this level, the conditioning thesis is false. We know how consumers resist particular precise injunctions, how they rove over the gamut of objects with which they might fulfil their 'needs', how advertis ing is not all-powerful and sometimes induces opposite reactions, and what substitutions there can be between one object and another to meet the same 'need' etc. In short, at the empirical level, a whole complicated strategy, psychological and sociological, cuts across the strategy of production. The truth is, not that 'needs are the fruits of production', but that the system of needs is the product of the system of production. This is quite different. By system of needs, we mean that needs are not pro duced one by one, in relation to the respective objects, but are produced Towards a theory of consumption 75 as consumption power, as an overall propensity within the more general framework of the productive forces. It is in this sense that the techno structure may be said to be extending its grasp. The order of production does not 'capture' the order of enjoyment (strictly speaking, such an idea is meaningless) for its own ends. It denies the order of enjoyment and supplants it, while reorganizing everything into a system of productive forces. Over the history of the industrial system, we may trace the following genealogy of consumption: 1 The order of production produces the machine /productive force, a technical system radically different from the traditional tool. 2 It produces capital/rationalized productive force, a rational system of investment and circulation, radically different from 'wealth' and from earlier modes of exchange. 3 It produces waged labour power, an abstract, systematized product ive force, radically different from concrete labour and the traditional 'workmanship'. 4 And so it produces needs, the system of needs, demand/productive force as a rationalized, integrated, controlled whole, complementary to the three others in a process of total control of the productive forces and production processes. Needs as a system are also radically different from enjoyment and satisfaction. They are produced as system elements, not as a relationship of an individual to an object (just as labour power no longer has anything to do with - and even denies - the worker 's relation to the product of his labour, and just as exchange-value no longer has anything to do with concrete, personal exchange, or the commodity form with real goods, etc.). This is what Galbraith - and with him all the 'alienists' of consumption fail to see, as they persist in demonstrating that man's relation to objects, man's relation to himself is rigged, bamboozled, manipulated - consuming this myth as he consumes objects - because, accepting the timeless postulate of a free, conscious subject (in order to have this resurface at the end of history in a happy ending), they cannot but attribute all the dysfunctions they uncover to a diabolical power - here the techno structure, armed with advertising, public relations and motivational research. This is magical thinking if ever there were such a thing. They do not see that needs, taken one by one, are nothing and that there is only a system of needs, or rather that needs are only the most advanced form of the rational systematization of the productive forces at the individual level, where 'consumption' takes over logically and necessarily from production. This may clear up a number of mysteries which are inexplicable to our pious 'alienists'. They deplore the fact, for example, that, though we are in the 'age of affluence', the puritan ethic has not been abandoned, that the old moral and self-denying Malthusianism has not been replaced by a modern mentality based on enjoyment. The whole of Dichter 's Strategy 76 The theory of consumption of Desire is aimed at getting around and subverting these old mental structures 'from below'. And it is true: there has been no revolution of mores and the puritan ideology is still in force. In the analysis of leisure we shall see how it pervades all apparently hedonistic practices. We may assert that the puritan ethic, with all it implies in terms of sublimation, transcending of self and repression (in a word, in terms of morality), haunts consumption and needs. It is that ethic which drives it from the inside and gives it this compulsive, unlimited character. And the puritan ideology is itself reactivated by the process of consumption: this is indeed what makes the latter the powerful factor of integration and social control we know it to be. Now, all this remains paradoxical and inexplicable from the point of view of consumption-as-enjoyment. By contrast, all is clear if we accept that needs and consumption are in fact an organized extension of the productive forces: there is then nothing surprising about the fact that they should also fall under the productivist and puritan ethic which was the dominant morality of the industrial age. The generalized integration of the individual 'private' level (needs, feelings, aspirations, drives) as productive forces cannot but be accom panied by a generalized extension at this level of the patterns of repression, sublimation, concentration, systematization, rationalization - and, of course, alienation! - which for centuries, but particularly since the nineteenth century, have governed the construction of the industrial system. Shifting Objects - Shifting Needs Until now the whole analysis of consumption has been based on the naIve anthropology of Homo oeconomicus, rather than Homo psycho oeconomicus. Within the ideological extension of classical political eco nomy, it has been a theory of needs, objects (in the broadest sense) and satisfactions. Or, rather, it has not been a theory, but an immense tautology: 'I buy this because I need it' is equivalent to the fire which burns because of its phlogistic essence. We have shown elsewhere to what degree all this empiricist/ finalist thinking (the individual taken as end, and his conscious representation taken as the logic of events) was of the same order as the magical speculation of primitive peoples (and ethnologists) around the notion of mana.!O No theory of consumption is possible at this level: the spontaneously self-evident, like analytical thinking in terms of needs, will never produce anything but a consumed reflection of consumption. This rationalist mythology of needs and satisfactions is as naIve and helpless as traditional medicine is when faced with hysterical or psycho somatic symptoms. Let us explain this point: outside the field of its objective function, where it is irreplaceable, outside the field of its denotation, the object becomes substitutable in a more or less unlimited Towards a theory of consumption 77 way within the field of connotations, where it assumes sign-value. Thus the washing machine serves as an appliance and acts as an element of prestige, comfort, etc. It is strictly this latter field which is the field of consumption. All kinds of other objects may be substituted here for the washing machine as signifying element. In the logic of signs, as in that of symbols, objects are no longer linked in any sense to a definite function or need. Precisely because they are responding here to something quite different, which is either the social logic or the logic of desire, for which they function as a shifting and unconscious field of signification. Objects and needs are here substitutable, within reason, like the symptoms of hysterical or psychosomatic conversion. They obey the same logic of slippage, transference, limitless and apparently arbitrary convertibility. When an illness is organic, there is a necessary relation between symptom and organ (similarly, when taken as an appliance or tool, there is a necessary relation between the object and its function). In hysterical or psychosomatic conversion, the symptom is, like the sign, (relatively) arbitrary: there is a chain of somatic signifiers - migraine, bowel disorder, lumbago, throat infection, general fatigue - along which the symptom 'wanders', just as there is a long sequence of signs/objects or symbols/objects over which wander not needs (which are always linked to the rational finality of the object), but desire and a further determination which is that of the unconscious social logic. If we pin the need down to a particular spot, if, that is, we satisfy it by taking it literally, by taking it as it presents itself, as the need for a particular object, then we make the same mistake as we would in applying a traditional remedy to the organ where the symptom is located. As soon as it is cured at this one point, it will resurface at another. The world of objects and needs might thus be seen as a world of generalized hysteria. Just as, in conversion, all the body's organs and functions become a gigantic paradigm for the symptom to work its way through, in consumption objects become a vast paradigm for another language to work through, for something other to speak. And we might say that this evanescence, this continual mobility to the point where it becomes impossible to define an objective specificity of the need (just as it is impossible in hysteria to define an objective specificity of the illness for the good reason that it does not exist), this flight from one signifier to another is merely the superficial reality of a desire which is, for its part, insatiable because it is based on lack. And that it is this forever unquenchable desire which signifies itself locally in successive objects and needs. Sociologically - in the face of the endless, naIve confusion at the unstoppable advance and boundless renewal of needs, which is in fact irreconcilable with the rationalist theory that a satisfied need creates a state of equilibrium and resolution of tensions - we may advance the hypothesis that, if one admits that need is never so much the need for a 78 The theory of consumption particular object as the 'need' for difference (the desire for the social meaning), then it will be clear that there can never be any achieved satisfaction, or therefore any definition of needY To the shifting nature of desire must be added, then (though is there a metaphorical relation between the two?), the shifting nature of differ ential significations. Between the two, individual, finite needs only assume meaning as successive foci. It is in their very substitution that they signify, yet simultaneously veil, the true spheres of signification - the spheres of lack and difference - which overflow them on all sides. Denial of Enjoyment The 'craving' for objects is 'objectless' (Riesman). Consumer behaviour, which is apparently focused on, and orientated towards, objects and enjoyment [jouissance], in fact conduces to quite other goals: that of the metaphorical or displaced expression of desire, that of production, through differential signs, of a social code of values. It is not, then, the individual function of interest across a corpus of objects which is determinant, but the immediately social function of exchange, of com munication, of distribution of values across a corpus of signs. The truth of consumption is that it is not a function of enjoyment, but a function of production and, hence, like all material production, not an individual function, but an immediately and totally collective one. With out overturning the traditional conception in this way, no theoretical analysis is possible: whatever approach one takes, one falls back into the phenomenology of enjoyment. Consumption is a system which secures the ordering of signs and the integration of the group: it is therefore both a morality (a system of ideological values) and a communication system, a structure of exchange. It is on this basis, and on the fact that this social function and structural organization far surpass individuals and impose themselves upon them by way of an unconscious social constraint, that we can found a theoretical hypothesis that is neither a mere reciting of figures nor a descriptive metaphysics. According to this hypothesis, paradoxical as it may seem, consump tion is defined as exclusive of enjoyment. As social logic, the consumption system establishes itself on the basis of a denial of enjoyment. Enjoyment no longer appears there at all as finality, as rational end, but as the individual rationalization of a process whose ends lie elsewhere. Enjoy ment would define consumption for oneself, as something autonomous and final. But consumption is never that. Enjoyment is enjoyment for one's own benefit, but consuming is something one never does alone (this is the illusion of the consumer, meticulously sustained by the whole of the ideological discourse on consumption). One enters, rather, into a generalized system of exchange and production of coded values where, in spite of themselves, all consumers are involved with all others. Towards a theory of consumption 79 In this sense, consumption is an order of significations, like language, or like the kinship system in primitive society. A Structural Analysis? Let us recall here the Levi-Straussian principle: what confers on con sumption its character of being a social fact is not what it apparently preserves of nature (satisfaction, enjoyment/pleasure), but the essential procedure by which it breaks with nature (what defines it as a code, an institution, a system of organization). Just as the kinship system is in the last instance based not on consanguinity and filiation, on a natural datum, but on an arbitrary classification arrangement, so the system of consumption is in the last instance based not on need and enjoyment but on a code of signs (signs /objects) and differences. Marriage rules are so many ways of providing for the circulation of women within the social group or, in other words, so many ways of replacing a system of consanguineous relations of a biological order by a sociological system of alliance. Marriage rules and kinship systems may thus be regarded as a kind of language or, in other words, as a set of operations aimed at ensuring a certain type of communication between individuals and groups. It is the same with consumption: there, too, a bio-functional, bio-economic system of goods and products (the bio logical level of need and subsistence) is supplanted by a sociological system of signs (the level of consumption proper). And the basic function of the regulated circulation of objects and goods is the same as it is with women or words: ensuring a certain type of communication. We shall come back to the differences between these various types of 'language' : they have to do essentially with the mode of production of the values exchanged and the type of division of labour attaching to them. Clearly, goods are something produced, which women are not, and they are produced in a different way from words. The fact remains that, at the distribution level, goods and objects - like words and (in the past) women - form a global, arbitrary, coherent system of signs, a cultural system which, for the contingent world of needs and enjoyment, for the natural and biological order, substitutes a social order of values and classification. This is not to say that there are no needs or no natural utility, etc. The point is, rather, that consumption, as a concept specific to contemporary society, is not to be defined at that level. For needs and the like are valid for all societies. What is sociologically significant for us, and which marks out our age as an age of consumption, is precisely the generalized reorganization of this primary level into a system of signs which reveals itself to be one of the specific modes, and perhaps the specific mode, of transition from nature to culture in our era. The circulation, purchase, sale, appropriation of differentiated goods and signs/objects today constitute our language, our code, the code by 80 The theory of consumption which the entire society communicates and converses. Such is the structure of consumption, its language [langue], by comparison with which individual needs and pleasures [jouissances] are merely speech effects. The Fun System or Enforced Enjoyment One of the strongest proofs that the principle and finality of consumption is not enjoyment or pleasure is that that is now something which is forced upon us, something institutionalized, not as a right or a pleasure, but as the duty of the citizen. The puritan regarded himself, his own person, as a business to be made to prosper for the greater glory of God. His 'personal' qualities, his 'character ', which he spent his life producing, were for him a capital to be invested opportunely, to be managed without speculation or waste. Conversely, but in the same way, consumerist man [l'homme consommateur] regards enjoyment as an obligation; he sees himself as an enjoyment and satisfaction business. He sees it as his duty to be happy, loving, adulating/adulated, charming/charmed, participative, euphoric and dynamic. This is the principle of maximizing existence by multi plying contacts and relationships, by intense use of signs and objects, by systematic exploitation of all the potentialities of enjoyment. There is no question for the consumer, for the modern citizen, of evading this enforced happiness and enjoyment, which is the equivalent in the new ethics of the traditional imperative to labour and produce. Modern man spends less and less of his life in production within work and more and more of it in the production and continual innovation of his own needs and well-being. He must constantly see to it that all his potentialities, all his consumer capacities are mobilized. If he forgets to do so, he will be gently and insistently reminded that he has no right not to be happy. It is not, then, true that he is passive. He is engaged in - has to engage in - continual activity. If not, he would run the risk of being content with what he has and becoming asocial. Hence the revival of a universal curiosity (a concept to be explored further) in respect of cookery, culture, science, religion, sexuality, etc. 'Try Jesus! ' runs an American slogan. You have to try everything, for con sumerist man is haunted by the fear of 'missing' something, some form of enjoyment or other. You never know whether a particular encounter, a particular experience (Christmas in the Canaries, eel in whisky, the Prado, LSD, Japanese-style love-making) will not elicit some 'sensation'. It is no longer desire, or even 'taste', or a specific inclination that are at stake, but a generalized curiosity, driven by a vague sense of unease - it is the 'fun morality' or the imperative to enjoy oneself, to exploit to the full one's potential for thrills, pleasure or gratification. Towards a theory of consumption Consumption as the Emergence and Control of New Productive Forces 81 Consumption is, therefore, merely an apparently anomic sector, because it is not, according to the Durkheimian definition, governed by formal rules and seems open to the immoderation and individual contingency of needs. It is not at all, as is generally imagined (this is why economic 'science' is, ultimately, reluctant to discuss it), a marginal sector of indeterminacy where the individual, elsewhere constantly constrained by social rules, might at last - being left to himself in the 'private' sphere - recover a margin of freedom and personal leeway. Consumption is an active, collective behaviour: it is something enforced, a morality, an institution. It is a whole system of values, with all that expression implies in terms of group integration and social control functions. The consumer society is also the society of learning to consume, of social training in consumption. That is to say, there is a new and specific mode of socialization related to the emergence of new productive forces and the monopoly restructuring of a high-productivity economic system. Credit plays a crucial role here, even if it only partially affects spending budgets. It is an exemplary idea because, in the guise of gratification, ease of access to affluence and a hedonist mentality 'freed from the old taboos of saving, etc.', credit is in fact a systematic socio economic training in enforced saving and economic calculation for generations of consumers who would otherwise, in a life of subsistence, have escaped demand planning and would not have been exploitable as consumption power. Credit is a disciplinary process of the extortion of savings and the regulation of demand, just as wage labour was a rational process of extortion of labour power and increases in productivity. The example quoted by Galbraith of the Puerto Ricans who have been turned from the passive, easygoing people they once were into a modern labour force by being motivated to consume is striking evidence of the tactical value of regulated, enforced, instructed, stimulated consumption with in the modern socio-economic order. And this is achieved, as Marc Alexandre shows in his article 'La societe de consommation', by the mental training of the masses through credit (with the discipline and budgetary constraints it imposes) in economic foresight, investment and 'basic' capitalist behaviour.12 The rational and disciplinary ethics which was, according to Weber, at the origins of modern productivist capital ism, in this way invests a whole area which had previously eluded it. It is difficult to grasp the extent to which the current training in systematic, organized consumption is the equivalent and extension, in the twentieth century, of the great nineteenth-century-long process of the training of rural populations for industrial work. The same process of rationalization of productive forces which took place in the nineteenth century in the sector of production reaches its culmination in the twentieth in that of 82 The theory of consumption consumption. The industrial system, having socialized the masses as labour power, had much further to go to complete its own project [s'accomplir] and socialize them (that is, control them) as consumption power. The small savers or anarchic consumers of the pre-war age, who were free to consume or not, no longer have any place in this system. The whole ideology of consumption is there to persuade us that we have entered a new era and that a decisive human 'Revolution' separates the painful, heroic Age of Production from the euphoric Age of Con sumption, where justice is at last done to Man and his desires. Nothing could be further from the truth. Production and consumption are part of one and the same process of expanded reproduction of the productive forces and their control. This imperative, which is that of the system, passes into daily mentalities, ethics and ideology - and here is the great trick - in its inverted form: in the form of the liberation of needs, individual self fulfilment, enjoyment and affluence, etc. The themes of Spending, Enjoy ment and Non-Calculation ('Buy now, pay later ') have taken over from the 'puritan' themes of Saving, Work, and Heritage. But this is merely the semblance of a Human Revolution: in fact, it is an internal substitution, within the framework of a general process and a system which remain in all essentials unchanged, of a new system of values for an old one which has become (relatively) ineffective. What could become a new finality has become, when emptied of its real content, an enforced mediation of the reproduction of the system. The needs and satisfactions of consumers are productive forces that have now been constrained and rationalized like the others (labour power, etc.). From all the angles we have (as yet barely) explored, consumption has thus appeared to us, by contrast with the ideology through which we experience it, as a dimension of constraint: 1 it is dominated by the constraint of signification at the level of struc tural analysis; 2 and by the constraint of production and of the production cycle in the strategic (socio-economico-political) analysis. Affluence and consumption are not, then, achieved Utopia. They are a new objective situation, governed by the same basic processes, but overdetermined by a new morality - the whole corresponding to a new sphere of productive forces in process of controlled integration into the same expanded system. In this sense, there is no objective 'Progress' (nor, a fortiori, has there been any 'Revolution'): we have here quite simply the same thing and something else. This results in the fact, which is indeed perceptible in everyday life, of the total ambiguity of Affluence and Consumption: they are always lived as myth (the assumption of happi ness beyond history and morality) and endured as an objective process of adaptation to a new type of collective behaviour. On consumption as a civic constraint, Eisenhower stated in 1958: 'In a free society, government best encourages economic growth when it Towards a theory of consumption 83 encourages the efforts of individuals and private groups. The government will never spend money as profitably as an individual tax-payer would have were he freed from the burden of taxation.' It is as though consumption, while not being a direct impost, might effectively succeed taxation as a social levy. 'With nine million dollars of tax cuts,' adds Time magazine, 'consumers went to two million retail stores in search of prosperity . . . They realized that they could increase economic growth by replacing their fans with air-conditioners. They secured the boom of 1954 by purchasing five million miniaturized television sets, a million and a half electric carving knives etc.' In short, they performed their civic duty. 'Thrift is un-American,' said Whyte. On needs as productive forces - the equivalent of the 'reserves of labour ' of the heroic age - take this advertisement for cinema advertis ing: Thanks to its giant screens, cinema enables you to present your product in situ: colours, shapes, packaging. The 2,500 cinemas in our advertising network have a weekly audience of three and a half million. 67% of that audience are between 15 and 35. They are consumers at the height of their needs who want, and are able, to buy.' They are, precisely, people at the height of their (labour) powers. The Logistical Function of the Individual 'The individual serves the industrial system not by supplying it with savings and the resulting capital; he serves it by consuming its products. On no other matter, religious, political, or moral, is he so elaborately and skilfully and expensively instructed,' writes Galbraith.13 The system needs people as workers (wage labour), as savers (taxes, loans, etc.), but increasingly it needs them as consumers. The productivity of labour is increasingly a matter for technology and organization and investment is increasingly left to companies themselves (d. Paul Fabra, 'Les superbenefices et la monopolisation de l'epargne par les grandes entreprises', Le Monde, 26 June 1969). Where the individual as such is required and is practically irreplaceable today is as a consumer. We may therefore predict that the heyday of the system of individualist values is just around the corner, that system whose centre of gravity is currently shifting from the individual entrepreneur and saver, those figureheads of competitive capitalism, to the individual consumer, broadening out at the same time to the totality of individuals - keeping step in this regard with the extension of the techno-bureaucratic structures. During the competitive stage, capitalism sustained itself after a fashion with a hybrid system of individualistic and altruistic values. The fiction of an altruistic social morality (inherited from the whole of traditional spirituality) was there to smooth over the antagonism of social relations. The 'moral law' was the product of individual antagonisms, just as the 'law of the market' was that of competitive processes: it preserved the 84 The theory of consumption fiction of an equilibrium. Individual salvation for the community of all Christians, and individual rights limited only by the rights of others, were long-held beliefs. They are impossible today. Just as the 'free market' has virtually disappeared, to be replaced by bureaucratic, state monopoly control, so altruistic ideology is no longer sufficient to restore a minimum of social integration. No other collective ideology has arisen to take over from these values. Only the state's collective constraint is there to halt the exacerbation of individualisms. Hence the deep contra diction between political and civil society in the 'consumer society': the system is forced to produce more and more consumer individualism, which it is at the same time forced to repress ever more harshly. This can only be resolved by an added dose of altruistic ideology (itself bureau cratized: 'social lubrication' by solicitude, redistribution, gifts, hand-outs, wholesale propaganda for charitableness and human relations).14 Since this dose of altruistic ideology itself forms part of the system of con sumption, it is not capable on its own of helping it attain equilibrium. Consumption is, therefore, a powerful element of social control (by the atomization of consuming individuals), but by that very fact it brings with it a need for ever greater bureaucratic constraint on the processes of consumption - which will as a consequence be exalted more and more energetically as the realm of freedom. There is no escaping from this circle. The automobile and traffic provide the classic example of all these contradictions: unlimited promotion of individual consumption sits alongside desperate calls for collective responsibility and social morality and increasingly severe constraints. The paradox is as follows: one cannot both repeat to the individual that 'the level of consumption is the just measure of social merit' and demand of him another kind of social responsibility since, in his individual consumption efforts, he is already taking on that social responsibility fully. Once again, consumption is social labour. The consumer is required and mobilized as worker at this level too (perhaps as much today as he is at the level of 'production'). One should not, then, ask the 'consumption worker ' to sacrifice his wages (his individual satisfactions) for the good of the collectivity. Somewhere in their social subconscious, the millions of consumers have a kind of practical intuition of this new status as alienated worker. They spontaneously interpret the call for public solidarity as mystification, and their tenacious resistance on this level is merely a reflex of political defence. The 'fanatical egoism' of the consumer is also the subconscious rough sense of being, in spite of all the emotional rhetoric on affluence and well-being, the new exploited subject of modern times. The fact that this resistance and this 'egoism' lead the system into irresolvable contra dictions to which it responds only by reinforced constraints merely confirms that consumption is a gigantic political field, the analysis of which - after that of production and alongside it - remains to be carried out. Towards a theory of consumption 85 The whole discourse on consumption aims to make the consumer Universal Man, to make him the general, ideal and definitive embodi ment of the Human Race and to turn consumption into the beginnings of a 'human liberation' that is to be achieved instead of, and in spite of, the failure of political and social liberation. But the consumer has nothing of a universal being about him: he is himself a political and social being, a productive force and, as such, he breathes new life into some basic historical problems: of ownership of the means of consumption (not the means of production), of economic responsibility (responsibility for the content of production), etc. There is here a potential for deep crises and new contradictions. The Ego consumans Nowhere - or hardly anywhere - up to now have these contradictions surfaced consciously, apart from a few strikes by American housewives and the sporadic destruction of consumer goods (May 1968 and the 'No bra day', when American women publicly burned their bras). And it has to be said that everything is stacked against this happening. 'What does the consumer represent in the modern world? Nothing. What could he be? Everything, or almost everything. Because he remains alone next to millions of other solitary individuals, he is at the mercy of every vested interest' (Le Cooperateur, 1965). And it must be said that individualist interest plays a large part in this (even though we have seen that there are contradictions latent within it). Because it affects a collective sector, the sector of social labour, exploitation by dispossession (of labour power) reveals itself generative of solidarity (beyond a certain threshold). It leads to a (relative) class consciousness. The managed possession of consumer goods and objects is individualizing, atomizing and de historicizing. As a producer, by the very fact of the division of labour, the worker presupposes others: exploitation is the exploitation of all. As a consumer, man becomes solitary again, or cellular - at best, he becomes gregarious (watching TV with the family, part of the crowd at the stadium or the cinema, etc.). The structures of consumption are both very fluid and closed. Can one imagine car drivers organizing against road tax? Or collective action being mounted against television? Every one of millions of TV viewers may be opposed to advertising, but it will still be broadcast. The fact is that consumption is orchestrated initially as a speaking to oneself [un discours a soi-memel, and it tends to play itself out, with its satisfactions and disappointments, in this minimal exchange. The consumer object isolates. The private sphere has no concrete neg ativity because it is enfolded in on its objects, which have none. It is structured from the outside by the system of production whose strategy (no longer ideological at this level, but always political) . . . whose strategy of desire invests in this instance the materiality of our existence, 86 The theory of consumption its monotony and its distractions. Or, alternatively, as we have seen, the consumer object produces distinction(s), produces status stratification. If, in this case, it no longer isolates, it differentiates. It collectively assigns consumers to a code, without, however, arousing any collective solidarity (in fact, it does the opposite). Overall, then, consumers as such are lacking in consciousness and unorganized, as was often the case with workers in the early nineteenth century. It is as such that they are everywhere celebrated, praised, hymned by 'right-thinking' writers as 'Public Opinion', that mystical, providential, sovereign reality. Just as 'the People' is glorified by Democracy provided that it remains the people (and does not intervene on the political and social stage), so consumers are recognized as enjoying sovereignty (Katona speaks of the 'powerful consumer ') so long as they do not attempt to exercise it on the social stage. The People are the workers, provided they are unorganized. The Public and Public Opinion are the consumers, provided they content themselves with consuming. 6 Personalization or the Smallest Marginal Difference To Be or Not to Be Myself There is no woman, however demanding, who cannot satisfy the tastes and desires of her personality with a Mercedes-Benz! From the hue of the leather, the trim and the colour of the bodywork to the hubcaps and the thousand and one comforts offered by the fittings, standard or optional. As for men, though mainly concerned with the technical qualities and performance of a car, they will willingly fulfil their wives' desires, since they will be equally proud to be complimented on their good taste. You can choose your Mercedes-Benz from 76 different colour styles and 697 selections of interior decor. To have found your personality, to be able to assert it, is to discover the pleasure of being truly yourself. It often takes very little to achieve this. After a great deal of searching, I realized that a little light tint in my hair was enough to create perfect harmony with my complexion and my eyes. I found this blonde tone in the Recital range of rinses . . . And this Recital blonde, which is so natural, has not changed me. I am more than ever myself. These two pieces (there are so many one could have chosen) were taken from Le Monde and a minor women's weekly respectively. The prestige and social status evoked within them are worlds apart: between the magnificent Mercedes 300 SL and the 'little light tint' of the Recital shampoo there is an enormous social gulf, and the women represented in the two pieces doubtless never meet (except perhaps at the Club Mediterranee - who knows?). They are at opposite ends of the social scale, but united by the same constraint of differentiation, personalization. The one is 'A', the other 'non-A', but the pattern of 'personal' value is the same for both, and for all of us beating a path through the 'personalized' jungle of 'optional' merchandise, desperately seeking the foundation cream that will reveal the naturalness of our face, the little touch that will show up our deep individual bent, the difference which will make us ourselves. All the contradictions involved in this theme, which is basic to consumption, can be felt in the desperate gymnastics performed by the language in which it is expressed, in the constant attempt to achieve an impossible, magical synthesis. If you are someone, can you 'find' your personality? And where are you while this personality is haunting you? If you are yourself, do you have to be so 'truly'? There again, if you have a false 'self' for a double, is a little light tint sufficient to restore the 88 The theory of consumption miraculous unity of one's being? What does this 'so' natural blonde mean? Is it natural or isn't it? And if I am myself, how can I be so 'more than ever '? Wasn't I entirely myself yesterday? Can I raise myself to the second power? Can I represent an added value to myself, appreciating as a company's assets appreciate? One could find thousands of examples of this illogicality, of this internal contradiction eating away at all that relates to the personality today. 'But,' as Riesman writes, 'the product now in demand is neither a staple nor a machine; it is a personality.' The high point of this magical litany of personalization is achieved with the following injunction: Personalize your own home yourself! This 'over-reflexive' expression (personalizing oneself . . . in person etc.!) tells the real story. What all this rhetoric says, while floundering about unable to say it, is precisely that there is no one there - no person. The 'person' as absolute value, with its indestructible features and specific force, forged by the whole of the Western tradition as the organizing myth of the Subject - the person with its passions, its will, its character (or banality) - is absent, dead, swept out of our functional universe. And it is this absent person, this lost instance which is going to 'personalize' itself. It is this lost being which is going to reconstitute itself in abstracto, by force of signs, in the expanded range of differences, in the Mercedes, in the little light tint, in a thousand other signs, incorporated and arrayed to re-create a synthetic individuality and, at bottom, to shine forth in the most total anonymity, since difference is by definition that which has no name. The Industrial Production of Differences Advertising as a whole has no meaning. It merely conveys significations. Its significations (and the behaviours they call forth) are never personal: they are all differential; they are all marginal and combinatorial. In other words, they are of the order of the industrial production of differences - and this might, I believe, serve as the most cogent definition of the system of consumption. The real differences which characterized persons made them contra dictory beings. Differences of the 'personalizing' type no longer set individuals one against another; these differences are all arrayed hier archically on an indefinite scale and converge in models, on the basis of which they are subtly produced and reproduced. As a result, to differ entiate oneself is precisely to affiliate to a model, to label oneself by reference to an abstract model, to a combinatorial pattern of fashion, and therefore to relinquish any real difference, any singularity, since these can only arise in concrete, conflictual relations with others and the world. This is the miracle and the tragedy of differentiation. In this way, the whole process of consumption is governed by the production of Personalization 89 artificially diversified models (like brands of soap powder), where the trend to monopoly is the same as in the other sectors of production. There is monopoly concentration of the production of differences. This is an absurd formula: monopoly and difference are logically incompatible. If they can be combined, it is precisely because the differences are not differences and, instead of marking a person out as someone singular, they mark rather his conformity with a code, his integration into a sliding scale of values. There is in 'personalization' something similar to that 'naturalization' effect we constantly meet in the environment - the effect which consists in restoring nature as sign after it has been eliminated in reality. Thus, for example, a forest is cut down to build a group of buildings, which are then given the name 'Park Estate' and a few trees are planted to create a 'natural' feel. The 'naturalness' which haunts the whole of advertising is, similarly, a 'cosmetic' effect: 'Use Ultra-Beauty cosmetics for the smooth, even, lasting look in which your complexion has that natural bloom you dream of!' . . . 'I'm certain my wife doesn't use make-up! ' . . . 'This veil of make-up, invisible and yet present: Similarly, the 'functionalization' of an object is a coherent abstraction which superimposes itself upon - and everywhere substitutes for - its objective function ('functionality' is not use-value, it is sign-value). The logic of personalization is the same: it is contemporaneous with naturalization, functionalization, culturalization, etc. The general process can be defined historically: it is industrial monopoly concentration which, abolishing the real differences between human beings, homo genizing persons and products, simultaneously ushers in the reign of differentiation. Things are much the same here as with religious or social movements: it is upon the ebbing of their original impulse that churches or institutions are built. Here, too, it is upon the loss of differences that the cult of difference is founded. 1 Modern monopoly production is never just the production of goods; it is always also the (monopoly) production of relations, and of differences. Thus, a deep logical collusion links the mega-corporation and the micro consumer, the monopoly structure of production and the 'individualistic' structure of consumption, since the 'consumed' difference in which the individual revels is also one of the key sectors of generalized production. At the same time, under the sign of monopoly, there is very great homogeneity today between the various contents of production/ consumption: goods, products, services, relations and differences. All these things, once distinct, are now produced in the same way, and are thus equally fated to be consumed. There is also in the combinatorial personality an echo of the combinat orial culture we spoke of above. Just as that consisted in a collective realignment, through the mass media, to the lowest common culture (LCC), so personalization consists in a daily realignment to the smallest 90 The theory of consumption marginal difference (SMD): seeking out the little qualitative differences by which style and status are indicated. For example, smoke a Kent: The actor smokes one before going on stage, the rally driver before clipping on his helmet, the painter before signing his canvas, the young boss before saying 'no' to his main shareholder[!] . . . The moment it ceases to smoulder in the ashtray, the action is on - precise, calculated, unstoppable. Or smoke a Marlboro, like the journalist 'with two million readers awaiting his editorial'. You have a classy girl and an Alfa-Romeo 2600 Sprint? Just add 'Green Water' cologne and the trinity is complete: your status as a true aristocrat of the post-industrial age is secure. Or put the same earthenware tiles in your kitchen as Fran<;oise Hardy or the same built-in gas hob as Brigitte Bardot. Or use a toaster which makes you initialled toast, or put charcoal 'aux herbes de Provence' in your barbecue. Of course, the 'marginal' differences themselves are part of a subtle hierarchy. From the highly select bank, with its Louis XVI-style safes reserved for 800 choice clients (Americans who must keep at least 25,000 dollars in their current accounts) to the managing director 's desk which is antique or Premier Empire (for senior managers, opulent functional suffices), from the arrogant prestige of nouveau riche villas to the non chalance of high-class clothing, all these marginal differences mark out the most rigorous social discrimination, in accordance with a general law of the distribution of distinctive matter (and against that law - even more than against the criminal law - ignorance is no defence) . Not everything is permitted, and violations of this code of differences, which, though it is a shifting one, is no less a ritual for all that, are punished. As can be seen in the amusing story of the commercial traveller who bought the same Mercedes as his boss and was fired. He appealed against his dismissal and was granted compensation by a tribunal, but the employer did not take him back. All men are equal before objects as use-value, but they are by no means equal before objects as signs and differences, which are profoundly hierarchical. Metaconsumption It is important to grasp that this personalization, this pursuit of status and social standing, are all based on signs. That is to say, they are based not on objects or goods as such, but on differences. Only in this way can we understand the paradox of 'underconsumption' or 'inconspicuous consumption', i.e. the paradox of prestigious super-differentiation, which is no longer displayed in ostentation (Veblen's 'conspicuous consump tion'), but in discretion, sobriety and self-effacement. These latter merely represent a further degree of luxury, an added element of ostentation which goes over into its opposite and, hence, a more subtle difference. Differentiation may then take the form of the rejection of objects, the rejection of 'consumption', and yet this still remains the very ultimate in consumption. Personalization 9 1 I f you're wealthy and middle-class, don't go t o the Quatre-Saisons. Leave the Quatre-Saisons to the young couples panicking over the funds they haven't got, the students, the secretaries, the salesgirls, the workers sick of living in squalor . . . Leave it to all those who want nice furniture because ugliness is wearisome, but want simple furniture too because they hate pretentious flats. Who is going to answer this perverse invitation? Some wealthy middle class individual, perhaps, or some intellectual anxious to seem a man of the people. At the level of signs, there is no absolute wealth or poverty, nor any opposition between the signs of wealth and the signs of poverty: they are merely sharps and flats on the keyboard of differences. 'Ladies, come to X for the most windswept look you can find! ' . . . 'This simple dress leaves not a hint of haute couture.' There is also a full-blown syndrome of anti-consumption, a very 'modern' phenomenon which is, at bottom, a metaconsumption and acts as a cultural indicator of class. The middle classes tend rather towards conspicuous consumption. They are, in this regard, heirs to the great capitalist dinosaurs of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This is where they are culturally naive. Needless to say, there is a whole class strategy behind this: One of the few restrictions on the consumption of the mobile person is the resistance of the upper class to the arrivistes by exercise of the strategy of conspicuous underconsumption; in this way the already arrived attempt to impose their own limits on those who would become their peers.2 This phenomenon, in its many and varied forms, is a crucial one for the interpretation of our society, since one might be taken in by this formal reversal of signs and mistake what is merely a change in the form of the distance between classes as an effect of democratization. It is on the basis of luxury that the lost simplicity is consumed. And this same effect is met at all levels: it is on the basis of the bourgeois condition that intellectual 'slumming' and 'proletarianism' are consumed, just as, in another sphere, it is on the basis of a lost heroic past that contemporary Americans go on package tours to prospect for gold in the rivers of the West: this 'exorcism' of opposite effects, of lost realities, of contradictory terms is everywhere the sign of an effect of consumption and over consumption which, in every case, fits into a logic of distinction. It is crucial to grasp this social logic of differentiation as fundamental to the analysis and to see that the exploitation of objects as differential, as signs - the level which alone specifically defines consumption - is precisely established upon the relegation of their use-value (and the 'needs' attaching to it). Preferences in the consumption field are not viewed as a development of the human ability to relate oneself discriminatingly to cultural objects. For the objects are hardly given meaning in private and personal values when they are so heavily used as counters in a preferential method of relating oneself to others. The cultural objects, whatever their nature, are mementos that some how remain unhumanized by the force of a genuinely fetishistic attachment.3 92 The theory of consumption This factor (the priority of differential value), which Riesman applies to 'cultural' objects (though there is in this regard no difference between 'cultural objects' and 'material objects'), can be seen illustrated in an almost experimental way by the example of a mining town in the Quebec taiga, where, as the reporter tells us, in spite of the proximity of the forest and the almost total uselessness of a car, every family nonetheless has its automobile outside its door: This vehicle, washed and polished, and occasionally taken out for a run of a few miles on the local bypass (there are no other roads) is a symbol of the American standard of living, the sign that one belongs to mechanical civilization. (and the author compares these magnificent limousines with a totally useless bicycle found in the Senegalese bush outside the house of a black former NCO who had returned to live in his village). Even more strikingly, the same demonstrative, ostentatious reflex leads well-off executives to have summer cottages built in a IO-mile radius around the town. In this spacious, airy town, with its salubrious climate and open to nature on all sides, what could be more useless than a 'place in the country'! What we see at work here, then, is prestigious differentiation in the pure state, and we see to what extent the 'objective' reasons for owning an automobile or a second home merely provide a cover for a more fundamental determination. Distinction or Conformism? The logic of differentiation is not generally made a principle of analysis by traditional sociology. That sociology identifies a 'need of the individ ual to differentiate himself' as one more element in the repertoire of individual needs, which it sees as alternating with the opposite need to conform. The two coexist happily at the psycho-sociological descriptive level, in the most total illogicality and absence of theory - a state of affairs dubbed 'dialectic of equality and distinction' or 'dialectic of conformism and originality', etc. This is to confuse everything. It has to be recognized that consumption is not ordered around an individual with his personal needs, which are then subsequently indexed, according to demands of prestige or conformity, to a group context. There is, first, a structural logic of differentiation, which produces individuals as person alized, that is to say, as different one from another, but in terms of general models and a code, to which, in the very act of particularizing them selves, they conform. The singularity/ conformism schema, regarded in terms of the individual, is not essential: it is merely the level of life experience. The basic logic is that of differentiation/personalization, viewed in terms of the code. In other words, conformity is not status equalization, the conscious homogenization of the group (each individual aligning himself with the others), but the fact of having the same code in common, of sharing the same signs which make all the members of that Personalization 93 group different from a particular other group. It is the difference from the other group which creates the parity (rather than the conformity) of the members of a group. Consensus is established differentially, and the effect of conformity is merely the result of this. This is a crucial point, since it entails that all sociological analysis (particularly where consump tion is concerned) is to be shifted from the phenomenal study of prestige, 'imitation' and the superficial field of the conscious social dynamic towards the analysis of codes, structural relations, and systems of signs and distinctive material - that is to say, towards a theory of the unconscious field of social logic. Thus, the function of this system of differentiation goes far beyond the satisfaction of needs of prestige. If we accept a hypothesis we advanced earlier, we can see that the system never operates in terms of real (singular, irreducible) differences between persons. What grounds it as a system is precisely the fact that it eliminates the specific content, the (necessarily different) specificity of each human being, and substitutes the differential form, which can be industrialized and commercialized as a distinguishing sign. It eliminates all original qualities and retains only the schema generative of distinctions and the systematic production of that schema. At this level, differences are no longer exclusive: not only do they logically imply one another in the combinatory of fashion (in the same way as there is 'play' between different colours), but, in socio logical terms, it is the exchange of differences which clinches group integration. Differences coded in this way, far from dividing individuals, become rather the matter of exchange. This is a fundamental point, through which consumption is defined: not any longer (1) as a functional practice of objects - possession, etc., or (2) as a mere individual or group prestige function, but (3) as a system of communication and exchange, as a code of signs continually being sent, received and reinvented - as language. In the past, differences of birth, blood and religion were not ex changed: they were not differences of fashion, but essential distinctions. They were not 'consumed'. Current differences (of clothing, ideology, and even sex) are exchanged within a vast consortium of consumption. This is a socialized exchange of signs. And if everything can be ex changed in this way, in the form of signs, this is not by virtue of some 'liberalization' of mores, but because differences are systematically pro duced in accordance with an order which integrates them all as identify ing signs and, being substitutable one for another, there is no more tension or contradiction between them than there is between high and low or left and right. So, in Riesman, we see the members of the peer group socializing preferences, exchanging evaluations and, by their continual competition, ensuring the internal reciprocity and narcissistic cohesion of the group. They come together (Latin competere) in the group through 'competition', or rather through what, being filtered through the code of fashion, is no 94 The theory of consumption longer open and violent competition - such as that of the market or a physical struggle - but a ludic abstraction of competition. Code and Revolution It will be easier now to grasp the crucial ideological function of the system of consumption in the current socio-political order. That ideo logical function can be deduced from the definition of consumption as the establishment of a generalized code of differential values and from the function of the system of exchange and communication which we have just determined. Modem (capitalist, productivist, post-industrial) social systems do not, to any great extent, base their social control, the ideological regulation of the economic and political contradictions by which they are riven, on the great egalitarian and democratic principles, on that whole system of ideological and cultural values that is broadcast to all comers of the earth and is operative everywhere. Even when seriously internalized through schooling and socialization, these conscious egalitarian values - of law and justice, etc. - remain relatively fragile, and would never be up to the task of integrating a society whose objective reality they too visibly contradict. Let us say that at this ideological level, contradictions can always break out again. But the system can count much more effectively on an unconscious mechanism of integration and regulation. And this, unlike equality, consists precisely in involving individuals in a system of differences, in a code of signs. Such is culture, such is language, such is 'consumption' in the deepest sense of the term. What is politically effective is the creation not of a situation in which contradiction is replaced by equality and equilibrium, but of one in which contradiction is replaced by difference. The solution to social contradiction is not equalization, but differentiation. No revolution is possible at the level of a code - or, alternatively, revolutions take place every day at that level, but they are 'fashion revolutions', which are harmless and foil the other kind. Here again, the proponents of the classical analysis are wrong in their interpretation of the ideological role of consumption. It is not by heaping comfort, satisfaction and social standing on individuals that consump tion is able to defuse virulent social tension (that idea is linked to the naive theory of needs and can only lead to the absurd hope of making people ever more destitute in order to have them rebel). It is, rather, by training them in the unconscious discipline of a code, and competitive cooperation at the level of that code; it is not by creating more creature comforts, but by getting them to play by the rules of the game. This is how consumption can on its own substitute for all ideologies and, in the long run, take over alone the role of integrating the whole of society, as hierarchical or religious rituals did in primitive societies. Personalization 95 The Structural Models 'What mother has not dreamt of a washing machine specially designed for her alone?' asks an advert. And, indeed, what mother has not? Millions, then, have dreamt of the same washing machine, specially designed for each of them alone. 'The body you dream of is your own.' This admirable tautology, which self-evidently resolves down to an argument for a particular kind of bra, brings together all the paradoxes of 'personalized' narcissism. It is by coming close to your reference ideal, by being 'truly yourself', that you most fully obey the collective imperative and most closely coincide with a particular 'imposed' model. Fiendish trick or the dialectic of mass culture? We shall see how consumer society conceives itself as, precisely, a society of consumption and reflects itself narcissistically in its image. This process spreads right down to each individual, remaining all the while a collective function, and this explains why it is in no way incompatible with conformism. Indeed, the opposite is true, as the two examples above well illustrate. The narcissism of the individual in consumer society is not an enjoyment of singularity; it is a refraction of collective features. However, it is always presented as narcissistic invest ment of 'oneself' through smallest marginal differences (SMOs) . The individual is everywhere invited, primarily, to enjoy himself, to indulge himself. The understanding is that it is by pleasing oneself that one is likely to please others. Ultimately, perhaps, self-indulgence and self-seduction may totally supplant the objective aim of seduction. The enterprise of seduction turns round upon itself in a kind of perfect 'consumption', but its referent remains, nonetheless, the instance of the other. Put simply, pleasing has become an enterprise in which the person to be pleased is merely a secondary consideration. Like the repetition of the brand name in advertising. This invitation to self-indulgence is mainly directed at women. But the pressure is exerted on women through the myth of Woman. Woman as collective and cultural model of self-indulgence. Evelyne Sullerot puts this well: Woman is sold to women . . . while doing what she believes is preening herself, scenting herself, clothing herself, in a word 'creating' herself, she is, in fact, consuming herself. And this falls in with the logic of the system: not just one's relation ship with others, but also one's relation to oneself becomes a consumed relation. Though this should not be confused, once again, with the fact of being pleasing to oneself on the strength of genuine qualities - of beauty, charm, taste, etc. That is something quite different; in that case, there is no consumption, but a spontaneous and natural relation. Consumption is always defined by the substitution for this spontaneous relation of a relation mediated by signs. If woman does, in fact, consume herself, this 96 The theory of consumption is because her relation to herself is objectivized and fuelled by signs, signs which make up the feminine model, which constitutes the real object of consumption. It is that model women consume when they 'personalize' themselves. Ultimately, women 'can reasonably trust in neither the sparkle of their eyes, nor the softness of their skin: those things, which are theirs, bring them no certainty' (Bredin, La Nej). There is a great difference between having self-worth [valoir] by dint of natural qualities and showing oneself off to best advantage [se faire valoir] by sub scribing to a model and conforming to a ready-made code. What we have in this latter case is a functional femininity in which all the natural values of beauty, charm and sensuality give way to the exponential values of (artificially achieved) naturalness, eroticism, 'figure' and expressive ness. Like violence,4 the forms of seduction and narcissism are laid down in advance by models produced industrially by the mass media and com posed of identifiable signs (if all girls are to think they are Brigitte Bardot, then they must stand out from the crowd by virtue of their hair, their mouths or a particular feature of clothing - that is to say, necessarily the same thing for all of them). Everyone finds his or her own personality in living up to these models. The Masculine and the Feminine Models Functional femininity has its counterpart in functional masculinity or virility. The models are, quite naturally, arranged in twos. They are the product not of the differentiated nature of the sexes, but of the differential logic of the system. The relation of the Masculine and the Feminine to real men and women is relatively arbitrary. Increasingly today, men and women play equally on the two registers in creating their significations, but, for their part, the terms of the signifying opposition only derive validity from their distinction. These two models are not descriptive: they govern consumption. The masculine model is the model of particularity [exigence] and choice. All masculine advertising stresses the rule of choice, in terms of rigour and inflexible attention, as a matter of 'professional ethics'. The modern man of quality is particular or demanding. He will countenance no failing and he neglects no detail. He is a 'select' individual, though he is not so passively or by natural grace, but by practising selectivity (the fact that that selectivity is orchestrated by others is a quite separate matter). There is no question of letting himself go or indulging himself; his aim is to achieve distinction. Knowing how to choose and not to let one's standards slip are equivalent to the military and puritan virtues: intrans igence, decisiveness, valour. These virtues will be possessed by the least young dandy who buys his clothes from Romoli or Cardin. The mascu line model is, then, a model of competitive or selective virtue. Much Personalization 97 more deeply, choice - as a sign of belonging to the elect (he who chooses, who knows how to choose, is chosen, is one of the elect) - is the counterpart in our societies to the rite of challenge and competition in primitive ones: it confers status. In the feminine model, women are, much rather, enjoined to take pleasure themselves. It is not, in this case, selectivity and particularity, but self-indulgence and narcissistic concern for one's own welfare which are indispensable. At bottom, men are still being invited to play soldiers, and women to play dolls with themselves. Even at the level of modern advertising, the two models - the masculine and the feminine - are always segregated, then, and mascu line hierarchical pre-eminence still survives (it is here, in the models, that the fixity of the value system can be read: the hybridity of 'real' behaviour matters little in this regard, since the deep mentality is shaped by the models - and the masculine/feminine opposition, like that between manual and intellectual labour, has not changed). We have, then, to retranslate this structural opposition into the language of social supremacy. 1 The masculine choice is 'agonistic': it is, by analogy with the challenge, the noble behaviour par excellence. It is honour which is in play, or Bewiihrung (proving oneself), an ascetic and aristocratic virtue. 2 By contrast, what is perpetuated in the feminine model is the derived value, the vicarious value (Veblen writes of 'vicarious status' and 'vicarious consumption'). Women are only called on to gratify them selves in order the better to be able to enter as objects into the masculine competition (enjoying themselves in order to be the more enjoyable). They never enter into direct competition (except with other women over men). If a woman is beautiful - that is to say, if the woman is a woman she will be chosen. If the man is a man, he will choose his wife among other objects/ signs (his car, his wife, his eau de toilette). Under cover of self-gratification, woman (the feminine model) is consigned to the per formance of proxy 'services'. She is not autonomously determined. This status, shown up at the narcissistic level in advertising, has quite other - and equally real - aspects at the level of productive activity. Woman, whose fate lies with the paraphernalia (household objects), fulfils not only an economic function, but a prestige function, deriving from the aristocratic or bourgeois idleness of women who, by that idleness, attested to the prestige of their masters: the housewife does not produce; she does not show up in the nation's accounts; she is not recorded as a productive force. She is, in fact, fated to be of value as a force of prestige, by her official uselessness, by her status as a 'kept' slave. She remains an attribute, reigning over those secondary attributes, the house hold objects. Or, in the middle and upper classes, she devotes herself to 'cultural' activities. These are also unpaid, unaccounted and generally unaccount able. That is to say, they are activities involving no responsibility. She 98 The theory of consumption 'consumes' culture, though she does not even do this in her own right: it is decorative culture. Thus she is engaged in cultural promotion, which, in spite of all the democratic alibis, always falls in with this same require ment that it be useless. Ultimately, culture is simply a sumptuary side effect of 'beauty' - culture and beauty being not so much values in themselves, activities carried on for their own sake, as evidence of superfluity, an 'alienated' social function (performed by proxy). Once again, we are speaking here of differential models, which are not to be confused with real sexes, or with social categories. There is diffusion and contamination everywhere. Modern man (as we see every where in advertising) is also called on to indulge himself. The modern woman is called on to choose and to compete, to be 'particular' or 'demanding'. All this is, of course, in keeping with a society where the respective social, economic and sexual functions are relatively inter mingled. However, the distinction between the masculine and feminine models remains, for its part, total (and, indeed, even the mixing of social and occupational tasks and roles is, in the end, a weak and marginal phenomenon). It is even possible that the structural and hierarch ical opposition between the Masculine and the Feminine is growing stronger in certain respects. Thus, the appearance in advertisements (for Selimaille knitwear) of Publicis's handsome young male nude marked the extreme point of contamination. This did not, however, change the distinct and antagonistic models one jot. What it did bring out was the emergence of a 'third', hermaphroditic model, everywhere linked to the emergence of adolescence and youth. This is a sexually ambiguous, narcissistic model, but one much closer to the feminine model of self indulgence than the demanding masculine one. Furthermore, what we are seeing very generally today is the extension of the feminine model to the whole field of consumption. What we have said of women in their relationship to prestige values, and of their 'proxy' status, goes, virtually and absolutely, for Homo consumans in general - men and women together. And it goes for all members of social cat egories whose destinies lie more or less (increasingly, as the current political strategy has it) with 'paraphernalia', household objects and 'proxy' pleasures. Entire classes are thus fated, in the image of Woman (who, as Woman/Object remains emblematic of consumption), to func tion as consumers. Their promotion to the rank of consumers might thus be said to seal their destiny as serfs. Though, as is not the case with the housewife, far from sinking into oblivion, their alienated activity is today boosting the national economic figures. PART III MASS MEDIA, SEX AND LEISURE 7 Mass-Media Culture The 'Neo' - or Anachronistic Resurrection As Marx said of Napoleon III, sometimes in history the same events occur twice: the first time with real historical import; the second merely as caricatural evocation of the event, as a grotesque avatar of it - sustained by a legendary reference. Cultural consumption may thus be defined as the time and place of the caricatural resurrection, the parodic evocation of what already no longer exists - of what is not so much 'consumed' as 'consummated' (completed, past and gone). The tourists who journey by coach to the far north to re-enact the Gold Rush, hiring Eskimo tunics and clubs to provide some local colour, are people who are consuming: they are consuming in ritual form something which was a historical event, and has been forcibly reactualized as legend. In history, this process is called restoration: it is a process of the denial of history and the anti-evolutionist resurrection of earlier models. Con sumption, too, is thoroughly imbued with this anachronistic substance. In its service stations in winter, Esso offers you its log fire and barbecue kit. This is a characteristic example: it is the masters of petrol, the 'historical liquidators' of log fires and their entire symbolic value, who serve these back up to you as the Esso neo-Iog-fire. What is consumed here is the simultaneous, combined, collusive enjoyment of the auto mobile and the defunct prestige of everything whose death-knell the automobile sounded - these latter now resuscitated by the automobile! We ought not to see this as mere nostalgia: it is the historical and structural definition of consumption that, by way of this 'lived' level, it exalts signs on the basis of a denial of things and the real. We have already seen how, through mass communications, the pathetic hypocrisy of the minor news item heightens with all the signs of catastrophe (deaths, murders, rapes, revolution) the tranquillity of daily life. But this same pathetic redundancy of signs is visible everywhere: the glorification of the very young and the very old, the front-page treatment for blue-blood weddings, the mass-media hymning of the body and sexuality - everywhere we see the historical disintegration of certain 100 Mass media, sex and leisure structures celebrating, as it were, under the sign of consumption, both their real disappearance and their caricatural resurrection. The family is dissolving? It is glorified. Children aren't children any more? Childhood is turned into something sacred. The old are alone, sidelined? A col lective show of sympathy for the aged. And, even more clearly, the body is glorified precisely as its real possibilities are atrophying and it is increasingly harassed by the system of urban, professional and bureau cratic control and constraints. Cultural Recycling It is now one of the characteristic dimensions of our society, in so far as one's professional expertise, individual career path and social position are concerned, to engage in retraining - in what is known, in French, as Ie recyclage. It is now the case that everyone who does not wish to fall behind, be left on the shelf or lose their professional standing must 'update' their knowledge, their expertise - in short, their practical range of skills - on the labour market. This is a notion heard particularly in connection with technical staff and also, more recently, with teachers. It claims, therefore, to be scientific and based on the continual advance of knowledge (in the exact sciences, sales techniques, teaching methods, etc.), to which all individuals should normally adapt if they are to remain 'up to speed'. In fact, the term 'recycling' prompts a number of thoughts: it inevitably brings to mind the 'cycle' of fashion: in that field, too, everyone must be 'with-it' and must 'recycle themselves' - their clothes, their belongings, their cars - on a yearly, monthly or seasonal basis. If they do not, they are not true citizens of the consumer society. Now, it is clear that there is no continual progress in these fields: fashion is arbitrary, transient, cyclical, and adds nothing to the intrinsic qualities of the individual. It does, however, impose thoroughgoing constraints, and the sanction it wields is that of social success or banishment. We may ask ourselves whether the 'recycling of knowledge', under its scientific cover, does not conceal this same kind of accelerated, obligatory, arbitrary change as fashion, and does not bring into play at the level of knowledge and persons the same 'built-in obsolescence' as the cycle of production and fashion foists on material objects. In that case, we should have here not a rational process of the accumulation of scientific knowledge, but a non-rational social process of consumption, indissociable from all the others. Medical recycling: the check-up. Bodily, muscular, physiological re cycling: Le President1 for men; diets and beauty care for women; holidays for everyone. But we can (and must) extend this notion to much broader phenomena: the very 'rediscovery' of the body is a corporeal recycling; the 'rediscovery' of Nature, in the form of a countryside trimmed down to the dimensions of a mere sample, surrounded on all Mass-media culture 101 sides by the vast fabric of the city, carefully policed, and served up 'at room temperature' as parkland, nature reserve or background scenery for second homes, is, in fact, a recycling of Nature. That is to say, it is no longer an original, specific presence at all, standing in symbolic opposi tion to culture, but a simulation, a 'consomme' of the signs of nature set back in circulation - in short, nature recycled. If we have not yet reached this point everywhere, it is nonetheless the current trend. Whether we speak of countryside planning, conservation or environment, it is, in every case, a question of recycling a nature which is itself doomed. Like events, like knowledge, Nature is governed in this system by the principle of being up-to-the-minute. It has to change functionally, like fashion. It provides an ambience and is therefore subject to a replacement cycle. This is the same principle as is today invading the occupational field, where the values of science, technique, skill and competence are giving way to 'recycling' - that is to say, to the irresistible pressures of mobility, status and the career profile.2 This principle of organization governs all 'mass' culture today. What all the acculturated receive is not culture, but cultural recycling. (Ulti mately, not even the truly 'cultured' escape this, or at least they will not.) They get to be 'in the know', to 'know what's going on'; they get to update their cultural rig-out on a monthly or yearly basis. They get to submit to that low-intensity constraint which is perpetually shifting like fashion and is the absolute opposite of culture conceived as: 1 an inherited legacy of works, thought and tradition; 2 a continuous dimension of theoretical and critical reflection - critical transcendence and symbolic function. Both these dimensions are also denied by the cyclical subculture, made up of obsolescent cultural ingredients and signs, by the up-to-the-minute cultural scene, which runs from kinetic art to weekly encyclopaedias - recycled culture. We can see that the problem of the consumption of culture is not, properly speaking, linked to cultural contents. Nor is it connected with the 'audience for culture' (the eternal false problem of the 'vulgarization' of art and culture to which both the practitioners of 'aristocratic' culture and the champions of 'mass' culture fall prey). The decisive factor is not whether millions or only a few thousand partake of a particular work, but that that work, like the car of the year, or nature in parklands, is condemned to be merely an ephemeral sign because it is produced, deliberately or otherwise, in what is today the universal dimension of production: the dimension of the cycle and recycling. Culture is no longer made to last. It keeps up its claim to universality, of course, and to being an ideal reference, doing so all the more strongly for the fact that it is losing its semantic substance (just as Nature was never glorified quite so much before it was everywhere laid waste) . However, in its reality, and by its mode of production, it is subject to the same pressure to be 102 Mass media, sex and leisure 'up-to-the-minute' as material goods. And we must stress once again that this does not have to do with the industrial dissemination of culture. The fact that Van Gogh is exhibited in department stores or that Kierkegaard sells 200,000 copies is of no matter here. What affects the meaning of the works is the fact that all significations have become cyclical. In other words that, through the very system of communication, a particular mode of succession and alternation has been imposed upon them, a combinatorial modulation which is precisely that of hemlines and television pro grammes (d. below, 'Medium is Message'). And also the fact that, given this situation, culture, like the pseudo-event in 'public information', like the pseudo-object in advertising, can be produced (and virtually is produced) out of the medium itself, out of the code of reference. Here we find that same logical procedure we come upon in 'simulation models'3 or see at work in gadgets, which are merely a play on forms and technology. Ultimately, there is no longer any difference between 'cultural creativity' (in kinetic art, etc.) and this ludic/technical play of combinations. And no difference between 'avant-garde creations' and 'mass culture' either. The latter tends to combine stereotyped themes and (ideological, folk loric, sentimental, moral, historical) contents, while the former combines forms and modes of expression. But both play primarily on a code, and on a calculation of market share and amortization. Moreover, it is curious to see how the system of literary prizes, currently despised in the world of letters for its academic decrepitude (from a universal standpoint, it is, in fact, stupid to award a prize to one book a year), has gained a remarkable new lease of life from its adaptation to the functional cycle of modern culture. The regularity of these prizes, which in other ages was absurd, is now compatible with the present vogue for recycling, with the focus of cultural fashion on the present. In the past, these prizes marked out a book for posterity, and it was faintly ridiculous. Today, they mark out a book for topical interest, and it works. They have found their second wind. The Tirlipot and the Quiz Machine, or the Lowest Common Culture (LCC) The mechanics of the tirlipot game consist, in theory, in seeking out the definition of a verb by question-and-answer methods (tirlipoter [to 'whatsit'] is the equivalent of the 'thingamyjig', a floating signifier for which, by selective restitution, the specific signifier is to be substituted).4 It is, then, in theory, an intellectual learning process. It is evident, however, that, with a few rare exceptions, the contestants are incapable of asking real questions: they find questioning, probing or analysing a nuisance. They start out from the answer (a particular verb which they have in mind) and deduce the question from it. This is, in fact, the interrogative form of the dictionary definition (e.g. 'is to tirlipot to put an Mass-media culture 1 03 end to something?' If the compere says 'Yes, in a way' or even, simply, 'Perhaps . . . what do you have in mind?', then the automatic reply comes back 'to finish' or 'complete'). What we have here is precisely the approach of the handyman trying one screw after another to see if they fit, a rudimentary exploratory method based on trial-and-error, with no rational investigation involved. With the quiz machine we find the same principle. There is no learning. A minicomputer asks you questions, offering a range of five replies to each. You choose the right answer. Time counts. If you respond instant aneously, you get maximum points and are a 'champion'. This is not, therefore, thinking time, but reaction time. The machine does not bring intellectual processes into play, but merely immediate reaction mecha nisms. You must not weigh up the proposed answers or deliberate: you have to see the right answer, register it like a stimulus on the same optomotor lines as the photo-electric cell. To know is to see (d. the Riesmannian 'radar', which allows you to move about among other people, maintaining or cutting off the contact, immediately selecting positive and negative relationships). Most of all, there must be no analytical thinking: this is penalized by a lower points total due to the time wasted. If these games do not have a learning function (as is always argued by the programme-makers and the mass-media ideologues), what in fact is their function? In tirlipot, it is clearly participation: the content is of no importance. For the contestant, it is the pleasure of occupying the airwaves for 20 seconds, long enough to have one's voice heard, to mingle that voice with the compere's, to hold his attention by striking up a brief dialogue with him and, through him, to strike up magical contact with that warm and anonymous multitude, the public. It is clear that most people are not at all disappointed when they get the answer wrong. They have had what they wanted: communion - or, rather, that modern, technical, aseptic form of communion that is communication, 'contact'. What marks out the consumer society is not, in fact, the much deplored absence of ceremonies - the radio game is a ceremony just as much as the mass or primitive sacrifice - but the fact that ceremonial communion is no longer achieved by way of bread and wine, which can be seen as flesh and blood, but through the mass media (which are not just the messages, but the whole broadcasting set-up, the network, the station, the receivers and, of course, the programme-makers and public). In other words, communion is no longer achieved through a symbolic medium, but through a technical one: this is what makes it communication. What is shared, then, is no longer a 'culture', the living body, the actual presence of the group (everything which made up the symbolic and metabolic function of the ceremony and the feast), nor is it even knowledge in the proper sense of the term, but that strange corpus of signs and references, of recollections from schooldays and intellectual fashion signals known as 'mass culture', which we might term lowest 1 04 Mass media, sex and leisure common culture (LCC), the way one speaks of a lowest common denominator in mathematics. This is also akin to the 'standard package' which lays down the lowest common panoply of objects the average consumer must possess in order to accede to the title of citizen of this consumer society. The LCC lays down the lowest common panoply of 'right answers' the average individual is supposed to possess if he is to win his spurs as cultural citizen. Mass communication excludes culture and knowledge. There is no question of real symbolic or didactic processes coming into play, since that would be to compromise the collective participation which is the meaning of the ceremony, a participation which can only be enacted through a liturgy, a formal code of signs meticulously voided of all meaning content. We can see that the term 'culture' is potentially very misleading. This cultural 'consomme', this 'digest' /repertoire of coded questions/ answers, this LCC, is to culture what life insurance is to life: it is there to ward off its dangers, and, on the basis of the denial of a living culture, to glorify the ritualized signs of culturalization. However, this LCe, which draws its sustenance from an automatized question-and-answer mechanism, has many affinities with the 'culture' of the schoolroom. Indeed, all these games have the archetype of the examination as their mainspring. And this is no accident. The examination is the pre-eminent form of social advancement. Everyone wants to take exams, even in bastardized, radiophonic form, because there is today something prestigious about being examined. The endless proliferation of these games contains within it, then, a powerful process of social integration: we can, ultimately, imagine a whole society integrated into these mass-media contests, the whole of social organization dependent on their sanction. There has already been one society in history which had a total system of selection and organization by examination: China under the Mandarins. But that system only affected an educated fringe. In this case, we should have entire masses mobilized in an endless game of double-or-quits, in which everyone would be securing or endangering his social destiny. In this way, we would be spared the archaic machinery of social control, the best system of integration having always been that of ritualized competition. We have not reached that point yet. For the moment, let us note the very great aspiration to be a part of the exam situation - a dual aspiration this, since everyone may be examined, but anyone can also slot into that situation as examiner, as judge (as a tiny fragment of that collective authority called the public). This is an oneiric duplication, phantasmic in the strictest sense: being both the one person and the other. But it is also a tactical operation of integration by delegation of power. What defines mass communication is, therefore, the combination of technical medium and LCC (not the massive numbers of people taking part). The quiz machine is also a mass medium, even if the game seems to be an individual one. In playing this machine, where Mass-media culture 105 intellectual dexterity registers as beeps and flashing lights - an admirable synthesis of knowledge and the household appliance - you are still being programmed by a collective agency. The computerized medium is merely a technical materialization of the collective medium, of that system of 'lowest common culture' signals which governs the participa tion of all in each and each in the same system. Let us say, once again, that it is pointless and absurd to compare High Culture and Mass-Media Culture and to contrast their value. The one has a complex syntax, the other is a combinatory of elements which can always be broken down into stimulus-response and question-and answer patterns. The latter is most vividly illustrated in the radio game. But, far beyond this ritual spectacle, this pattern governs the behaviour of the consumer in each of his acts, in his general conduct, which is organized as a series of responses to different stimuli. Tastes, preferences, needs, decisions: where both objects and relationships are concerned, the consumer is perpetually appealed to, 'questioned' and required to respond. Making a purchase is, in this context, akin to a radio quiz. It is today not so much an original act on the part of the individual aimed at concretely satisfying a need, as, primarily, the response to a question - a response which engages the individual in the collective ritual of con sumption. It is a game to the extent that every object is always one among a range of variants, between which the individual is required to choose - the act of purchasing is a choosing, the determination of a preference - precisely as he or she must choose between the answers offered by the quiz game. It is in this sense that the purchaser plays, replying to a question which is never the direct one regarding the utility of the object, but the indirect one regarding the 'play' among the variants of the object. That 'play' and the choice which marks its success ful conclusion characterize the purchaser/consumer as opposed to the traditional user. Lowest Common Multiples (LCMs) The lowest common culture (LCC) of the radio waves or the mass circulation magazines today has an artistic subsidiary. This is the multi plication of artworks, for which the Bible - itself now multiplied and delivered to the masses in weekly instalments - provided the miraculous prototype in the celebrated multiplication of loaves and fishes beside the Sea of Galilee. A great democratic wind has blown through the heavenly Jerusalem of culture and art. 'Contemporary art', from Rauschenberg to Picasso, from Vasa rely to Chagall and on to younger artists, is holding its 'private view' at the Printemps department store (though, admittedly, it is doing so at the top of the building and not compromising the second-floor 'interior decoration' department with its harbour views and setting 106 Mass media, sex and leisure suns). The work of art is breaking out of the solitude in which it has for centuries been confined as unique object and privileged moment. Once upon a time, as everyone knows, galleries were sanctuaries. But the masses have now taken over from the solitary owner or the enlightened art-lover. And there is not simply industrial reproduction to delight the masses, but a work of art that is both unique and collective: the Multiple. In a happy initiative, under the aegis of the Prisunic department stores, Jacques Putman has just published a collection of original prints at a very affordable price (100 F). No one finds it odd any longer to acquire a lithograph or an etching at the same time as a pair of stockings or a garden chair. The second 'Prisunic Suite' has just gone on show at L'Oeil gallery. It is now on sale in the shops. This is not a promotion, nor yet a revolution[! ] . The multiplication of images is a response to a multiplying public, which inevitably[!] leads to the creation of places to view those images. Experimental research no longer ends in enslavement to power and money: the art-loving benefactor is giving way to the participating client . . . Each numbered and signed print is made in an edition of 300 copies . . . A victory for the consumer society? Perhaps. But what matter, since quality is preserved? Those who will not understand contempor ary art today are those who do not want to. Art speculation, which was based on rarity value, is over. With the 'Unlimited Multiple', art moves into the industrial era (as it so happens, these Multiples, produced in limited editions, immediately give rise to a black market and 'alternative' speculation: the false ingenuousness of the producers and designers). The work of art in the pork butchers, the abstract in the factory . . . Don't say, 'What is Art?' any more; don't say, 'Art is too dear'; don't say, 'Art isn't for me': read Les Muses. It would be too easy to say that a Picasso painting in a factory will never abolish the division of labour and that the multiplication of multiples, were that to be achieved, will never abolish social division and the transcendence of Culture. The illusion of the ideologues of the Multiple (let us not speak here of the conscious or subconscious speculators among both artists and dealers, though they are by far the largest group involved) and of cultural dissemination or promotion more generally is, nonetheless, an instructive one. Their noble effort to democ ratize culture or, where the designers are concerned, 'to create beautiful objects for the greatest number', visibly meets with failure - or with such commercial success that it becomes suspect as a result, which amounts to the same thing. But this contradiction is merely apparent: it exists because these fine souls stubbornly insist on regarding Culture as a universal, while seeking, at the same time, to disseminate it in the form offinite objects (whether unique or produced in their thousands). In so doing, they are merely delivering up to the logic of consumption (i.e. to the manipulation of signs) certain contents or symbolic activities which were not previously subject to that logic. Producing multiple works does not in itself imply any 'vulgarization' or 'loss of quality': what happens is that, as 'mass-produced' objects, works so produced become effectively Mass-media culture 1 07 objects of the same kind 'as the pair of stockings and the garden chair', and acquire their meaning in relation to those things. They no longer stand opposed, as works and as semantic substance - as open significa tions - to other finite objects. They have become finite objects themselves and are part of the package, the constellation of accessories by which the 'socio-cultural' standing of the average citizen is determined. This, at least, is what would happen in the best of cases, where everyone really did have access to them. For the moment, although they are not artworks any longer, these pseudo-works are nonetheless rare objects, economic ally or 'psychologically' inaccessible to most people and sustaining, as distinctive objects, a slightly expanded parallel Culture market. It is perhaps more interesting - though the problem is the same - to look at what is consumed in the weekly instalment encyclopaedias, such as La Bible, Les Muses, Alpha, Le Million and in the mass-circulation musical and artistic publications, such as Grands peintres and Grands musiciens. We know that the audience for these publications is potentially very large, embracing all those in the middle classes who are educated to secondary or technical level (or whose children are so educated): white collar workers, lower and middle managers. To these recent large-scale publications we should also add those which, from Science et vie to Historia and the like, have long fed the demand for culture of the 'potentially upwardly mobile'. What do they want from this frequenting of science, history, music and encyclopaedic knowledge - that is to say, of established, legitimate disciplines, the contents of which - unlike what is broadcast by the mass media - have a specific value? Are they looking to learn something, to acquire a real grounding in culture, or do they want a mark of social advancement? Are they looking to culture as a practice or as a possession to be acquired; are they seeking knowledge or status? Is what we have here a 'package effect' once again, that effect which, as we have seen, marks out - as one sign among others - the object of consumption? In the case of Science et vie (we draw in what follows on a reader ship survey of this magazine analysed by the Centre de sociologie europeenne), the readers' demands are ambiguous: there is here a disguised, clandestine aspiration to acquire 'high-brow' culture by way of accession to technical culture. Reading Science et vie is the product of a compromise: an aspiration to elite culture is present, but so too is a defensive counter-motivation in the form of a rejection of elitism (in other words, there is both an aspiration to join the higher class and a reaffirmation of class position). More precisely, such reading functions as a mark of membership. But membership of what? The abstract community, the virtual collective of all those driven by the same ambiguous exigency, of all those who also read Science et vie (or Les Muses, etc.). This is an act of allegiance of a mythological order: the reader imagines a group whose presence he consumes in abstracto through his reading: an unreal, mass relationship, which is, quite precisely, the mass communication effect. An 1 08 Mass media, sex and leisure undifferentiated complicity which nonetheless constitutes the deeply experienced substance of that reading - embodying a value of recogni tion, of membership, of mythic participation (one can detect just this same process at work among the readers of the Nouvel Observateur: to read that magazine is to affiliate oneself to the readers of that magazine; it is to use a 'cultural' activity as a class emblem). Naturally, most readers (we should perhaps say, most 'devotees') of these mass-circulation publications, which are the vehicles of a 'middle brow' culture, will claim in good faith that they are concerned with their content and that their aim is knowledge. But this cultural 'use-value', this objective goal, is largely overdetermined by the sociological 'exchange-value'. It is that demand, indexed to increasingly intense status competition, which is met by the vast 'culturalized' material of periodicals, encyclopaedias and paperback editions. All this cultural substance may be said to be 'consumed', in so far as its content does not sustain an autonomous practice, but a rhetoric of social mobility, and in so far as it meets a demand which has something other than culture as its object or, rather, seeks culture only as a coded element of social status. There is here an inversion, and the strictly cultural content appears only as connotation, as a secondary function. We can say, then, that it is consumed in the same way as a washing machine becomes a consumer good at the point where it is no longer an implement but a luxury, prestige element. We know that, at that point, it no longer has any specific presence and many other objects could be substituted for it - culture being, precisely, one of them. Culture becomes an object of consumption in so far as, sliding towards another discourse, it becomes interchangeable and homogeneous with other objects (even if it remains hierarchically superior to them). And this is true not only of Science et vie, but also of 'high' culture, 'great' painting, and classical music, etc. All these things can be sold together at the drugstore or the newsagents. But it is not, strictly speaking, a question of the sales outlet, the size of the production run or the 'cultural level' of the audience. If all these things are sold and consumed together, that is because culture is subject to the same competitive demand for signs as any other category of objects and that it is produced to meet that demand It is then subject to the same mode of appropriation as other messages, objects and images which make up the 'ambience' of our daily life: the mode of 'curiosity'. This is not necessarily something frivolous or casual; there may be passionate curiosity, particularly among those categories of people in process of acculturation. But it presupposes succession, cycles, the pressure for changes of fashion. Thus, for the exclusive practice of culture as a symbolic system of meaning it substitutes a ludic and combinatorial practice of culture as a system of signs. 'Beethoven is fabulous!' Ultimately, what individuals get from this 'culture' - which excludes both the autodidact, the marginal hero of traditional culture, and the Mass-media culture 109 cultured person, that embalmed humanistic flower on the verge of extinction - is cultural 'recycling', an aesthetic recycling which is one of the elements of the generalized 'personalization' of the individual, of cultural 'show' (faire-valoir] in competitive society and which is the equivalent, all other things being equal, of the setting-off or showing-off (faire-valoir] of the object by packaging. Industrial aesthetics - design - has no aim other than to restore to industrial objects - deeply affected by the division of labour and bearing the stamp of their functions - this 'aesthetic' homogeneity, this formal unity or playful dimension which might be said to connect them all in a kind of secondary 'environment' or 'ambience' function. This is the work of those 'cultural designers' one now finds every where: in a society where individuals are severely affected by the division of labour and the fragmentary nature of their work, they seek to 'redesign' them through 'culture', to integrate them into a single formal shell, to facilitate interaction in the name of the promotion of culture, to promote an ambience for people, as design does for objects. Moreover, we should not lose sight of the fact that this packaging, this cultural recycling is, like the 'beauty' industrial aesthetics bestows upon objects, 'undeniably a selling point', to quote Jacques Michel. 'It is an acknow ledged fact today that a pleasant environment, created by harmony of shapes and colours and, of course, the quality of materials[ ! ], has a beneficial effect on productivity.'s And it is true: acculturated people, like designed objects, are better integrated socially and professionally; they 'fit in' better and are more 'compatible' . One of the happiest hunting grounds of the functionalism of human relations is the promotion of culture: there 'human design' meets 'human engineering'. We need a term which would be to culture what 'Aesthetics' (in the sense of industrial aesthetics, the functional rationalization of forms, the play of signs) is to beauty as a symbolic system. We have no word for this functionalized substance of messages, texts, images, classic master pieces or cartoon strips, this coded 'creativity' and 'receptiveness', which have replaced inspiration and sensibility, this collective managed work on significations and communication, this 'industrial culturality', haunted pell-mell by the cultures of all ages, which we continue, for want of a better word, to call 'culture', though we do so at an enormous cost in misunderstandings, nurturing a constant dream - in the hyperfunction alism of consumed culture - of the universal, of myths capable of deciphering our age without themselves being mythological 'spec taculars', of an art which could decipher modernity without being abolished in it. Kitsch Alongside gadgetry, one of the other major categories of modern object is kitsch. The kitsch object is commonly understood as one of that great 110 Mass media, sex and leisure army of 'trashy' objects, made of plaster of Paris [stuc] or some such imitation material: that gallery of cheap junk - accessories, folksy knick knacks, 'souvenirs', lampshades or fake African masks - which pro liferates everywhere, with a preference for holiday resorts and places of leisure. Kitsch is the equivalent of the 'cliche' in speech. And this should tell us that, as in the case of the gadget, we are dealing with a category which is difficult to define, but which should not be confused with any particular real objects. Kitsch can be anywhere: in the detail of an object or in the plan of a new residential area, in an artificial flower or in a photo-novel. It can best be defined as a pseudo-object or, in other words, as a simulation, a copy, an imitation, a stereotype, as a dearth of real signification and a superabundance of signs, of allegorical references, disparate connotations, as a glorification of the detail and a saturation by details. There is, moreover, a close affinity between its internal organiza tion (unconnected superabundance of signs) and its appearance on the market (proliferation of disparate objects, a mass-produced accumula tion). Kitsch is a cultural category. This proliferation of kitsch, which is produced by industrial reproduc tion and the vulgarization at the level of objects of distinctive signs taken from all registers (the bygone, the 'neo', the exotic, the folksy, the futuristic) and from a disordered excess of 'ready-made' signs, has its basis, like 'mass culture', in the sociological reality of the consumer society. This is a mobile society: broad swathes of the population are moving up the social ladder, reaching a higher status and, at the same time, acceding to cultural demand, which is simply the need to manifest that status in signs. At all levels of society, the generations of parvenus want their package. There is no point, then, blaming the 'vulgarity' of the public or the 'cynical' tactics of the industrialists who wish to shift their wares. Though this aspect is important, it cannot explain the cancerous excrescence of the mass of 'pseudo-objects'. There has to be a demand, and that demand is a function of social mobility. There is no kitsch in a society without social mobility. In such a society, a limited range of luxury objects suffices as distinctive material for the privileged caste. Even the copy of a work of art still has 'authentic' value in the classical age. By contrast, it is the great periods of social mobility which see the object flourish in other guises: it is with the rising bourgeoisie of the Renaissance and the seventeenth century that preciosity and the baroque emerge. Though these are not the direct ancestors of kitsch, they already bear witness to the growth and fragmentation of distinctive material at a time of social pressure and relative hybridity of the upper classes. It is, however, mainly since the time of Louis-Philippe in France, the Griinderjahre in Germany (1870-90) and the end of the nineteenth century and the age of the department stores in all Western societies, that the universal knick-knack form has become one of the major manifestations of the object and one of the most fruitful branches of commerce. That era Mass-media culture 111 is unending, since our societies are now potentially in a phase of continual mobility. Kitsch obviously reaffirms the value of the rare, precious, unique object (production of which can also become industrial). Kitsch and the 'authentic' object thus between them organize the world of consumption according to the logic of a distinctive material which is, today, always shifting and expanding. Kitsch has a weak distinctive value, but that weak value is linked to maximum statistical profitability: entire classes seize on it. This can be contrasted with the maximal distinctive quality of rare objects, which is connected with their limited supply. We are talking here not of beauty, but of distinctiveness, and this is a sociological function. In this sense, all objects can be classified hierarchically as values, depending on their statistical availability, on their more or less limited supply. This function defines at every moment, for a particular state of the social structure, the scope afforded to a particular social category to distinguish itself and mark its status through a particular category of objects or signs. When broader strata accede to a particular category of signs, the upper classes are obliged to distance themselves by other markers which are limited in number (either by their origin, such as paintings or authentic antiques, or systematically, such as luxury editions or custom-built cars). In this logic of distinction, kitsch is never innovative: it is defined by its derived and weak value. This weak valency is, in its turn, one of the reasons for its unlimited multiplication. It multiplies in ever greater quantities, whereas, at the top of the social ladder, 'classy' objects become fewer in number by increasing in quality and are revived by becoming rare. This derivative function is once again linked to its ' aesthetic' or anti aesthetic function. To the aesthetics of beauty and originality, kitsch opposes its aesthetics of simulation: it everywhere reproduces objects smaller or larger than life; it imitates materials (in plaster, plastic, etc.); it apes forms or combines them discordantly; it repeats fashion without having been part of the experience of fashion. In all this, it is all of a piece with the 'gimmicky' gadget in the technical world. That gadget is, similarly, a technological parody, an excrescence of useless functions, a continual simulation of function without any real, practical referent. This aesthetics of simulation is profoundly linked to kitsch's socially assigned function of translating social class aspirations and anticipations, of expressing the magical affiliation with a culture, with the forms, manners and markers of the upper class - an aesthetics of acculturation resulting in a subculture of objects.6 The Gadget and the Ludic The machine was the emblem of industrial society. The gadget is the emblem of post-industrial society. No rigorous definition of the gadget 112 Mass media, sex and leisure exists. If, however, we agree to define the object of consumption by the relative disappearance of its objective function (as an implement) and a corresponding increase in its sign function, and if we accept that the object of consumption is characterized by a kind of functional uselessness (what is consumed is precisely something other than the 'useful'), then the gadget is indeed the truth of the object in consumer society. Hence, anything can become a gadget and everything potentially is one. The gadget might be said, then, to be defined by its potential uselessness and its ludic combinatorial value? So both sew-on badges, which have had their hour of glory, and the 'Venusik', a perfectly 'pure' and useless cylinder of polished metal (its only possible use being as a paperweight, the function reserved for all absolutely useless objects!), are gadgets. 'Lovers of formal beauty and potential uselessness, the fabulous "Venusik" has arrived! ' But the typewriter which can write i n 13 different character sets, 'depending on whether you are writing to your bank manager or your lawyer, a very important client or an old friend', is also a gadget - for where is 'objective' uselessness to begin? As are the inexpensive home made trinkets and also the IBM dictation machine: 'Imagine a little machine (12cm X 15cm) you can have with you everywhere - in the office, at weekends and on your travels. You hold it in one hand and, with a flick of the thumb, whisper your decisions, dictate your directives, hail your victories. Everything you say is committed to its memory . . . Whether you are in Rome, Tokyo or New York, your secretary will not miss a single one of your syllables.' What could be more useful? What could be more useless? When technology is consigned to mental prac tices of a magical type or to modish social practices, then the technical object itself becomes a mere gadget again. In a car, are the chrome, the two-speed windscreen wipers and the electric windows gadgets? Yes and no: they do have some utility in terms of social prestige. The contemptuous connotation of the term comes quite simply from a moral perspective on the instrumental usefulness of objects: some are said to have a use, others not. By what criteria? There is no object, even the most marginal and decorative, that does not have some use, if only because, in having no use, it becomes once again a mark of distinction.8 Conversely, there is no object which does not, in a sense, serve no precise purpose (or which cannot, in other words, serve a purpose other than its intended one). There is no way out of this, except to define a gadget as something which is explicitly intended for secondary functions. Thus, not only the chrome, but also the 'cockpit' and the whole car are gadgets if they are part of a logic of fashion and prestige or part of a fetishistic logic. And the systematics of objects means that this is the dominant tendency for all objects today. The world of the pseudo-environment and the pseudo-object is one in which all 'functional' 'creators' revel. Take Andre Faye, 'technician of the art of living', who creates Louis XVI furniture, the stylish doors of which Mass-media culture 113 open to reveal the smooth, brilliant surface of a turntable or hi-fi speakers: His objects move, like Calder's mobiles: both everyday objects and real works of art can be designed on this basis. And when set in motion and coordinated with chromophonic projections, they come ever closer to the total spectacle to which he aspires . . . Cybernetic furniture, desks with variable geometry and orientation, a calligraphic Teletype machine . . . At long last a telephone fully built into the human body to enable you to call New York or answer Honolulu from the grounds of a mansion or beside a swimming pool. All this, for Faye, represents 'a subjugation of technology to the art of living'. And it all irresistibly calls to mind the Concours Lepine.9 What difference is there between the videophone desk and the cold-water based heating system devised by some illustrious inventor? Yet, there is a difference. It is that the good old artisanal brainwave was a curious excrescence, the mildly unhinged poetry of a heroic technology. The gadget, by contrast, is part of a systematic logic which lays hold of the whole of daily life in the spectacular mode, and, as a consequence, casts a suspicion of artificiality, fakery and uselessness over the whole envi ronment of objects, and, by extension, over the whole environment of human and social relations. In its broadest sense, the gadget attempts to move beyond the generalized crisis of purpose [finalite] and usefulness in the ludic mode. But it does not - and cannot - attain the symbolic freedom the toy has for the child. It is impoverished, a fashion effect, a kind of artificial accelerator of other objects; it is caught in a circuit where the useful and the symbolic resolve into a kind of combinatorial uselessness, as in those 'total' light shows, where the entertainment itself is a gimmick or, in other words, a social pseudo-event - a game without players. The pejorative resonance the terms 'gadgetry' and 'gimmickry' have acquired today ('a mere gadget', 'just gimmickry') no doubt reflects both a moral judgement and the anxiety generated by the generalized disappearance of use-value and the symbolic function. But the reverse is also true. That is to say, the combinatorial 'new look' of the gadget can be opposed by - and this is the case for any object, even one which is itself a gadget - the exaltedness of the new. The period of newness is, in a sense, the sublime period of the object and may, in certain cases, attain the intensity, if not the quality, of the emotion of love. This phase is one of a symbolic discourse, in which fashion and reference to others have no part. It is in this mode of intense relation that the child experiences his objects and toys. And it is not the least of the charms, later, of a new car, book, gadget or item of clothing that they plunge us back into absolute childhood. This is the opposite logic to that of consumption. The gadget is defined in fact by the way we act with it, which is not utilitarian or symbolic in character, but ludic. It is the ludic which increasingly governs our relations to objects, persons, culture, leisure and, at times, work, and also politics. It is the ludic which is becoming 114 Mass media, sex and leisure the dominant tone of our daily habitus, to the extent indeed that every thing - objects, goods, relationships, services - is becoming gadgetry or gimmickry. The ludic represents a very particular type of investment: it is not economic (useless objects) and not symbolic (the gadget/object has no soul), but consists in a play with combinations, a combinatorial modulation: a play on the technical variants or potentialities of the object - in innovation a playing with the rules of play, in destruction a playing with life and death as the ultimate combination. Here, our domestic gadgets link up once again with slot machines, tirlipots and the other cultural radio games, the quiz machine in the drugstore, the car dash board and the whole range of 'serious' technical apparatus which makes up the modern 'ambience' of work from the telephone to the computer all those things we play with more or less consciously, fascinated as we are by the operation of machines, by childlike discovery and manipula tion, by vague or passionate curiosity for the 'play' of mechanisms, the play of colours, the play of variants: this is the very soul of passionate play [le jeu-passion], but diffuse and generalized and hence less cogent, emptied of its pathos and become mere curiosity - something between indifference and fascination, which might be defined by its opposition to passion. Passion may be understood as a concrete relation to a total person or to some object taken as a person. It implies total investment and assumes an intense symbolic value. Whereas ludic curiosity is merely interest - albeit violent interest - in the play of elements. Take the pinball machine. The player becomes absorbed in the machine's noise, jolts and flashing lights. He is playing with electricity. As he presses the controls, he has a sense of unleashing impulses and currents through a world of multi-coloured wires as complex as a nervous system. There is in his play an effect of magical participation in science. To grasp this, one has only to observe the crowd which gathers around the repair man in a cafe when he opens up the machine. No one understands the connections and circuits, but everyone accepts this strange world as an incontrovertible datum. There is nothing here of the relation of rider to horse, worker to tools or art-lover to work of art. The relation of man to object is strictly magical, which is to say that it is bewitched and manipulatory. This ludic activity may give the appearance of being a passion. But it never is. It is consumption - in this case, abstract manipulation of lights, 'flippers' and electrical reaction times, in other cases, the abstract manip ulation of marks of prestige in the variants of fashion. Consumption is combinatorial investment: it is exclusive of passion. Pop: an Art of Consumption? The logic of consumption, as we have seen, can be defined as a manipulation of signs. The symbolic values of creation and the symbolic Mass-media culture 115 relation of inwardness are absent from it: it is all in externals. The object loses its objective finality and its function; it becomes a term in a much greater combinatory, in sets of objects in which it has a merely relational value. Moreover, it loses its symbolic meaning, its millenniaI anthro pomorphic status, and tends to peter out into a discourse of connotations which are also simply relative to one another within the framework of a totalitarian cultural system (that is to say, a system which is able to integrate all significations whatever their provenance). We have based our argument here on the analysis of everyday objects. There is, however, another discourse on the object - the discourse of art. A history of the changing status of objects and their representation in art and literature would itself be revealing. After operating in the whole of traditional art as symbolic, decorative props, objects have ceased in the twentieth century to be indexed to moral and psychological values; they have ceased to live by proxy in the shadow of man and have begun to take on extraordinary importance as autonomous elements in an analysis of space (Cubism, etc.). They have as a result been fragmented, even to the point of abstraction. Having celebrated their parodic resurrection in Dada and Surrealism, which were then destructured and volatilized by the abstract, they are apparently now reconciled again with their image in neo-figuration and pop art. It is here that the question of their contemporary status arises: indeed it is forced upon us by their sudden elevation to the zenith of artistic figuration. In short, is pop the form of art contemporaneous with the logic of signs and consumption we are speaking of, or is it merely an effect of fashion, and hence itself a pure object of consumption? There is no contradiction between the two. We may accept that pop art transposes an object-world, while at the same time simply issuing (by its own logic) in objects pure and simple. Advertising shares this same ambiguity. Let us formulate the matter another way: the logic of consumption eliminates the traditional sublime status of artistic representation. There is, strictly, no longer any privileging of the essence or signification of the object over the image. The one is no longer the truth of the other: they coexist in the same physical and logical space, where they also 'operate' as signs (in their differential, reversible, combinatorial relation).l0 Whereas all art up to pop was based on a 'depth' vision of the world,l1 pop regards itself as homogeneous with this immanent order of signs: homogeneous with their industrial, mass production and hence with the artificial, manufactured character of the whole environment, homo geneous with the spatial saturation and simultaneous culturalized abstraction of this new order of things. Does it succeed in 'rendering' this systematic secularization of objects, in 'rendering' this new sign-based [signaZetique] environment, which is wholly in externals, so that nothing remains of the 'inner light' which gave all earlier painting its prestige? Is it an art of the non-sacred? That is 116 Mass media, sex and leisure to say, an art of pure manipulation? Is it itself a non-sacred art or, in other words, an art productive of objects, but not creative? Some will say (including the pop artists themselves) that things are much simpler: they do what they do because they want to; basically, they enjoy doing it; they look around them and paint what they see; it is spontaneous realism, etc. This is mistaken. Pop signifies the end of perspective, the end of evocation, the end of testimony, the end of the creative act and, last but not least, the end of the subversion of the world and the curse of art. Its aim is not merely the immanence of the 'civilized' world, but its total integration into that world. There is in this a crazy ambition, the ambition of abolishing the splendours (and foundations) of a whole culture, the culture of transcendence. And there is in it perhaps quite simply also an ideology. Let us first remove two objections. First, that it is 'an American art' - in the objects it depicts (including the obsession with the Stars and Stripes), in its pragmatic, optimistic empir ical practice, in the undeniably chauvinistic infatuation of certain of its backers and collectors who have 'identified' with it etc. Though the objection is a tendentious one, let us reply to it objectively. If all these things are Americanism, the pop artists, following their own logic, cannot but sign up to them. If manufactured objects 'speak American', that is because they have no other truth than that mythology which swamps them - and the only rigorous approach is to integrate this mythological discourse and integrate oneself into it. If the consumer society is trapped in its own mythology, if it has no critical perspective on itself, and if that is precisely its dejinition,12 there can be no contemporary art which is not, in its very existence and practice, compromised by and complicit with that opaquely self-evident state of affairs. This is indeed why the pop artists paint objects in terms of their real appearance, since it is in that way, as ready-made signs, fresh from the assembly line', that they function mythologically. This is why they prefer to paint the brand names, slogans and acronyms these objects bear and, in the extreme case, may paint only those things (Robert Indiana). This is neither play nor 'realism': it is recognizing the obvious truth of the consumer society which is that the truth of objects and products is their brand name. If that is 'Americanism', then Americanism is the very logic of contemporary culture and one cannot fault the pop artists for pointing this up. No more, indeed, can one criticize them for their commercial success and for accepting it unashamedly. The worst thing would be for them to claim some 'accursed' status and thus reinvest themselves with a sacred function. It is logical for an art which does not contradict the world of objects, but explores its system, to make itself part of that system. It is even the end of a hypocrisy and of a radical illogicality. As opposed to earlier painting (since the end of the nineteenth century), whose genius and transcendence did not prevent it from being a signed object and an object marketed in terms of its signature (the abstract expressionists pushed this conquering genius and shameful opportunism to its Mass-media culture 117 extreme), the pop artists reconcile the object of painting and the painting as object. Coherence or paradox? In its predilection for objects, its endless figuration of 'branded' objects and food products - and also in its commercial success - pop is the first art to explore its own status as 'signed' and 'consumed' art object. Yet this logical enterprise, which one cannot but approve even in its extreme consequences (even where these contravene our traditional aesthetic morality), is accompanied by an ideology into which it is in some danger of sinking: an ideology of Nature, of 'Waking-Up' and authenticity reminiscent of the best moments of bourgeois spontaneity. This 'radical empiricism', 'uncompromising positivism', and 'anti teleologism' sometimes assumes a dangerously initiatory airY Oldenburg writes: I drove around the city one day with Jimmy Dine. By chance we drove along Orchard Street, which is crowded with small stores on both sides. As we drove I remember having a vision of The Store. In my mind's eye, I saw a complete environment based on this theme. It seemed to me that I had discovered a new world. Everywhere I went I began wandering through the different stores as if they were museums. I saw the objects displayed in windows as precious works of art. And Rosenquist: Then suddenly the ideas seemed to flow towards me through the window. All I had to do was seize them on the wing and start painting. Everything spontaneously fell into place - the idea, the composition, the images, the colors, everything started to work on its own. As is clear from this, the pop artists are not to be outdone by previous generations so far as 'Inspiration' is concerned. Since Werther, this theme has underpinned the ideality of a Nature to which one only has to be faithful to achieve truth. One simply has to awaken or reveal that Nature. In John Cage, the musician who inspired Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, we read: 'art should be an affirmation of life - not an attempt to bring order . . . but simply a way of waking up to the very life we are living, which is so excellent, once one gets one's mind, one's desires out of the way and lets it act of its own accord.' This assent to a revealed order - the universe of images and manufactured objects showing through ultimately as a nature - leads to mystico-realist professions of faith: 'A flag was just a flag, a number was simply a number' (Jasper Johns) or (Cage again) : 'We must set about discovering a means to let sounds be themselves', which supposes an essence of the object, a level of absolute reality that is never that of the everyday environment and which, in relation to that environment, constitutes nothing short of a surreality. Wesselmann speaks in this way of the 'super-realism' of an ordinary kitchen. In short, there is total confusion here and what we have is a kind of behaviourism composed of a juxtaposition of things seen (something like a consumer society impressionism), accompanied by a vague Zen or 118 Mass media, sex and leisure Buddhist mysticism of the stripping away of the ego or superego to rediscover the 'id' of the surrounding world. There is also something distinctly American about this curious mixture! But there is above all a serious ambiguity and incoherence here. For, by presenting the surrounding world not as what it is (first and foremost an artificial field of manipulable signs, a total cultural artifact, in which neither sensation nor vision are in play, but differential perception and the tactical play of significations), but as revealed nature, as essence, pop gives itself a dual connotation: on the one hand, it poses as the ideology of an integrated society (current society = nature = ideal society, though we have seen that this collusion forms part of its logic); on the other, it reinstates the whole sacred process of art, which destroys its own basic objective. Pop lays claim to be the art of the banal (it is on these grounds that it calls itself 'pop(ular)' art), but what is the banal but a metaphysical category, a modern version of the category of the sublime? The object is banal only in its use, in the moment of its use (the 'working' radio in Wesselmann's installations). The object ceases to be banal as soon as it signifies. Now, we have seen that the 'truth' of the contemporary object is no longer to be used for something, but to signify, no longer to be manipulated as an instrument, but as a sign. And it is the success of pop, at its best, to show it to us as such. Andy Warhol, who is the most radical in his approach, is also the artist who best sums up the theoretical contradiction in this art practice and the difficulties it has in envisaging its real object. He says: 'The canvas is an absolutely everyday object, like this chair or that poster' (as ever this desire to absorb art, to rehabilitate it, in which there is both American pragmatism - terroristic insistence on the useful, integrationist blackmail - and something like an echo of the mystique of sacrifice). He adds: 'Reality needs no intermediary, all you have to do is isolate it from the environment and put it on canvas.' Now, this is the whole question: the everydayness of this chair (or a particular hamburger, tail-fin or pin-up) is precisely its context and, specifically, the mass-produced context of all similar or almost similar chairs, etc. Everydayness is difference in repetition. By isolating the chair on the canvas, I remove all everydayness from it and, at the same time, deprive the canvas of its character of everyday object (in which respect, according to Warhol, it should absolutely resemble the chair). This is a familiar dead-end: art can neither be absorbed into everyday life (the canvas = the chair), nor can it grasp the everyday as such (the chair isolated on the canvas = the real chair). Immanence and transcendence are equally impossible: they are the two aspects of a single dream. There is, in short, no essence of the everyday, of the banal, and thus no art of the everyday: this is a mystical aporia. If Warhol (and others) believe that there is, that is because they delude themselves about the very status of art and the artistic act - something far from uncommon Mass-media culture 119 among artists. Indeed, we find the same mystical nostalgia at the level of the productive act: 'I would like to be a machine,' says Andy Warhol, who does in fact paint with stencils, silk screens, etc. Now, there can be no worse arrogance for art than to pose as machine-like, no greater affectation on the part of the person who enjoys the status of creator, whether he wishes it or not, than to devote himself to serial automatism. Yet, one cannot accuse Warhol or the pop artists of bad faith: their logical demand runs up against a sociological and cultural status of art which they are powerless to change. It is this powerlessness that is expressed in their ideology. When they try to desacralize their practice, society simply sacralizes them the more. And we arrive at the situation where their attempt - the most radical yet - to secularize art, both in its themes and in its practice, leads to a glorification and unprecedented manifestation of the sacred in art. Quite simply, the pop artists forget that, for a painting to cease to be a sacred super-sign (a unique object, a signature, the object of a noble, magical commerce), it is not sufficient to change the content of the picture or the artist's intentions: it is the structures of the production of culture which decide the matter. Ultimately, only the rationalization of the art market, on the same basis as any other indus trial market, could desacralize artworks and restore them to the status of everyday objects.14 This is perhaps neither conceivable, nor possible, nor even desirable. Who knows? At any event, it is the limit state: once one has reached it, one either stops painting or continues at the cost of sliding back into the traditional mythology of artistic creation. It is along this fault line that classical pictorial values are rehabilitated: of an 'expres sionist' kind in Oldenburg, fauvist and Matissian in Wesselmann, 'art nouveau' and akin to Japanese calligraphy in Lichtenstein, etc. But what do these 'legendary' resonances matter to us here? Of what consequence are these effects, which make it possible to say that 'this is still painting all the same'? The logic of pop lies elsewhere - not in an aesthetic computation or a metaphysics of the object. One could define pop as a game with - and a manipulation of - the different levels of mental perception, a kind of mental Cubism that would seek to diffract objects not in terms of a spatial analytics, but in terms of the modalities of perception elaborated over the centuries by a whole culture on the basis of its intellectual and technical machinery: objective reality, image-as-reflection, drawn figuration, technical figura tion (photography), abstract schematization, discursive utterance, etc. On the other hand, the use of the phonetic alphabet and industrial tech niques have imposed patterns of division, splitting, abstraction and repetition (ethnographers report the bewilderment of primitive peoples when they discover several absolutely identical books: their whole vision of the world is overturned). We may see in these various modes the thousand figures of a rhetoric of designation, of recognition. And this is where pop art comes in: it works on the differences between these different levels or modes, and on the perception of those differences. For 120 Mass media, sex and leisure example, the screen print of a lynching is not an evocation of an event: it presupposes that the lynching has already been transformed into a news item, a journalistic sign, by way of mass communications - a sign taken up again at one further remove by the screen print. The same photo graph repeated presupposes the single photograph and, beyond that, the real being whose reflection it is. And that real being might indeed figure in the work without exploding it: that would merely be one more combination. Just as there is no order of reality in pop art, only levels of significa tion, so too there is no real space. The only space is that of the canvas, of the juxtaposition of the different sign-elements and the relationship between them. There is no real time either, the only time being that of the reading, the differential perception of the object and its image, of a particular image and the same image repeated, etc. This is the time necessary for mental adjustment, for accommodation to the image, to the artifact in its relation to the real object (we are speaking here not of a reminiscence, but of the perception of a local, logical difference). That reading will not be the search for connections and coherence either, but an onward movement, a registering of succession. It is evident that the activity which pop imposes (taking it, once again, in its strictest ambition) is far removed from our 'aesthetic sense'. Pop is a 'cool' art: it demands not aesthetic ecstasy or affective or symbolic participation ('deep involvement'), but a kind of 'abstract involvement', a sort of instrumental curiosity. And this retains something of a child-like curiosity, a naive enchantment of discovery. And why not? One can also see pop as images d'Epinal or a book of hours of consumption, but one which particularly brings into play the intellectual reflexes of decoding and deciphering discussed above. All in all, pop art is not a popular art. For the popular cultural ethos (if such a thing exists) is based precisely on an unambiguous realism, on linear narration (and not on the repetition or diffraction of levels), on allegory and the decorative (and this is not pop art, since these two categories refer to 'something other ' which is essential), and on emo tional participation linked to the varying fortunes of good and evil forces.1s It is at a truly rudimentary level that pop art can be mistaken for a 'figurative' art: a colourful range of images, a naive chronicle of the consumer society, etc. It is true that Pop artists have been happy to claim that it is such. Their candour is immense, and their ambiguity too. As for their humour, or the humour ascribed to them, we are again on shifting ground. It might be instructive here to note the reactions of the public. In many, the works provoke a moral and obscene laugh (or hint of a laugh) - the canvases being indeed obscene to the classical gaze - followed by a derisive smile, which might be a judgement on either the objects painted or the painting itself. It is a smile which willingly enters into the game: 'This isn't very serious, but we aren't going to be scandalized by it. And, deep down, perhaps . . . ' But these reactions are rather strained, amid Mass-media culture 121 some shameful dejection at not knowing quite what to make of it all. Even so, pop is both full of humour and humourless. Quite logically, it has nothing to do with subversive, aggressive humour, with the telescoping of surrealist objects. It is no longer a question of short circuiting objects in their function, but one of juxtaposing them to analyse the relations between them. This approach is not terroristic.16 At most it involves something akin to cultural alienation effects. In fact, something quite different is going on here. To return to the system we have been describing above, let us not forget that a certain smile is one of the obligatory signs of consumption: it no longer represents a humour, a critical distance, but is merely a reminder of that transcendent critical value which today is given material embodiment in the knowing wink. This false distance is present everywhere: in spy films, in Godard, in modern advertising, which uses it continually as a cultural allusion. It is not really clear in the end whether this 'cool' smile is the smile of humour or that of commercial complicity. This is also the case with pop, and its smile ultimately encapsulates all its ambiguity: it is not the smile of critical distance, but the smile of collusion. The Orchestration of Messages In TV, radio, press and advertising, we find a discontinuum of signs and messages in which all orders are equivalent. A radio sequence taken at random includes: • an advert for Remington razors; • a summary of the last fortnight's social unrest; • an advert for Dunlop SP-Sport tyres; • a debate on capital punishment; • an advert for Lip watches; • a report on the war in Biafra; • an advert for Crio 'sunflower ' washing powder. In this litany, in which the drama of world history alternates with objects playing walk-on parts (the whole forming a kind of Prevert poem with alternating black and rose-tinted pages - the latter the advertising ones, of course), the periods of intensity are apparently the news reports. But these are also, paradoxically, the periods of neutrality and impersonality: the discourse about the world does not seek to generate concern. This tonal 'blankness' contrasts with the highly charged nature of the dis course on objects, with its cheery, elated note, its vibrato. All the pathos of reality, of unforeseen events, of persuasion is transferred to the object and its discourse. This careful balance between the discourse of 'news' [information] and the discourse of 'consumption', to the exclusive emo tional advantage of the latter, tends to assign advertising a background function, to allot it the role of providing a repetitious, and therefore reassuring, backdrop of signs against which the vicissitudes of the world 122 Mass media, sex and leisure are registered through an intermediary. Those vicissitudes, neutralized by the editing, are then ripe, themselves, for simultaneous consump tion. The radio news is not the hotch-potch it seems: its systematic alternation imposes a single pattern of reception, which is a pattern of consumption. And this is not so much because the value accorded to the advertising message by its tone suggests that, at bottom, world history is immaterial and the only things worth getting excited about are consumer objects. That is secondary. The real effect is more subtle: it is the imposition upon us, by the systematic succession of messages, of the equivalence of history and the minor news item, of the event and the spectacle, of information and advertising at the level of the sign. It is not in the direct discourse of advertising, but there that the real consumption effect is to be found. It is in the segmenting - thanks to the technical media of TV and radio - of the event and the world into discontinuous, successive, non contradictory messages - signs which can be juxtaposed and combined with other signs within the abstract dimension of the programme. What we consume, then, is not a particular spectacle or image in itself, but the potential succession of all possible spectacles - and the certainty that the law of succession and the segmenting of the schedules will mean that there is no danger of anything emerging within them that is not one spectacle or one sign among others. Medium is Message Here, and in this sense at least, we have to accept as a fundamental feature of the analysis of consumption McLuhan's formula that 'the medium is the message'. This means that the true message the media of TV and radio deliver, the one which is decoded and 'consumed' deep down and unconsciously, is not the manifest content of sounds and images, but the constraining pattern - linked to the very technical essence of those media - of the disarticulation of the real into successive and equivalent signs: it is the normal, programmed, miraculous transition from Vietnam to variety, on the basis of a total abstraction of both. And there is something like a law of technological inertia which means that the closer one gets to true documentary, to 'live coverage', and the more closely the real is pursued with colour, depth and one technical improvement after another, the greater does the real absence from the world grow. And the more the 'truth' of TV or radio has to be recog nized: that the primary function of each message is to refer to another message. So Vietnam refers on to advertising, advertising to the TV news, etc., the systematic juxtaposition of these things being the dis cursive mode of the medium, its message, its meaning. But we have to recognize that, while speaking to and of itself in this way, the medium is imposing a whole system of segmentation and interpretation of the world upon us. Mass-media culture 123 This technological process of mass communications delivers a certain kind of very imperative message: a message-consumption message, a message of segmentation and spectacularization, of misrecognition of the world and foregrounding of information as a commodity, of glorification of content as sign. In short, it performs a conditioning function (in the advertising sense of the term: in this sense, advertising is the 'mass' medium par excellence, and its schemata leave their stamp on all the other media) and a function of misrecognition. This is true of all the media, even of the book medium, of 'literacy', which McLuhan makes one of the central linkages in his theory. He takes the view that the emergence of the printed book was a key turning-point in our civilization, not so much for the contents (ideological, informa tional, scientific, etc.) it passes down from one generation to another, as for the basic constraint of systematization it exerts by virtue of its technical essence. He takes the view that the book is, first and foremost, a technical model, and that the order of communication prevailing within it (visual ized segmentation, letters, words, pages, etc.) is a more influential, more determining model in the long term than any particular symbol, idea or fantasy that makes up its manifest content: 'The effects of technology do not occur at the level of opinions or concepts, but alter sense ratios or patterns of perception steadily and without any resistance.'17 Self-evidently, most of the time, the content conceals from us the real function of the medium. It presents itself as a message, whereas the real message, with regard to which the manifest discourse is perhaps mere connotation, is the deep structural change (of scale, of model, of habitus) wrought in human relations. Crudely put, the 'message' of the railways is not the coal or the passengers it carries, but a vision of the world, the new status of urban areas, etc. The 'message' of TV is not the images it transmits, but the new modes of relating and perceiving it imposes, the alterations to traditional family and group structures. And we may go even further and say that, in the case of TV and the modern mass media, what is received, assimilated and 'consumed' is not so much a particular spectacle as the potentiality of all spectacles. This, then, is the truth of the mass media: it is their function to neutralize the lived, unique, eventual character of the world and sub stitute for it a multiple universe of media which, as such, are homo geneous one with another, signifying each other reciprocally and referring back and forth to each other. In the extreme case, they each become the content of the others - and that is the totalitarian 'message' of a consumer society. What the TV medium conveys by its technical organization is the idea (the ideology) of a world endlessly visualizable, endlessly segmentable and readable in images. It conveys the ideology of the omnipotence of a system of reading over a world become a system of signs. TV images present themselves as the metalanguage of an absent world. Just as the smallest technical object, the tiniest gadget, is a promise of a universal technical 124 Mass media, sex and leisure Assumption, so images/ signs are a presumption of an exhaustive imag ining of the world, of a total assumption of the mode of reality into the image, which might be regarded as its memory, its universal decoding unit. Behind the 'consumption of images' looms the imperialism of a system of reading: increasingly, only what can be read (what must be read: the 'legendary') will tend to exist. And there will no longer be any question then of the truth of the world, or its history, but only of the internal coherence of the system of reading. Thus, on a confused, conflictual, contradictory world, each medium imposes its own more abstract, more coherent logic; it imposes itself - a medium - as message, to use McLuhan's expression. And it is the substance of the fragmented, filtered world, the world reinterpreted in terms of this simultaneously technical and 'legendary' code, that we 'consume' - the entire material of the world, the whole of culture industrially processed into finished products, into sign material, from which all eventual, cultural or political value has vanished. If we regard the sign as the articulation of a signifier and a signified, we may specify two types of confusion. For the child, or the 'primitive', the signifier may fade in favour of the signified (as when the child mistakes its own image for a living being, or African TV viewers ask where the man who has just disappeared from the screen has gone). Conversely, in the self-centred image or the code-centred message, the signifier becomes its own signified, a circular confusion between the two arises to the signifier's advantage, and we see the abolition of the signified and the tautology of the signifier. This is what defines consump tion, the systematic consumption effect at the level of the mass media. Instead of going out to the world via the mediation of the image, it is the image which circles back on itself via the world (it is the signifier which designates itself under cover of the signified). We move from the message centred on the signified - a transitive message - to the message centred on the signifier. For example (in the case of TV), from events signified by the image to the consumption of the image as such - i.e. precisely as something different from those events, as spectacular - Brecht would say 'culinary' - substance, exhausting itself in the very time-span of its absorption, and never referring on beyond. Different too in the sense that it does not offer events to be either seen or understood in their (historical, social or cultural) specificity, but delivers them up, all without distinction reinterpreted in terms of the same code which is at once an ideological structure and a technical structure - i.e., in the case of TV, the ideological code of mass culture (a system of moral, social and political values) and the mode of segmentation, of articulation of the medium itself, which imposes a certain type of discursivity that neutralizes the multiple and shifting content of messages and substitutes its own imperative constraints of meaning. Unlike the manifest discourse of the images, this deep-level discursivity of the medium is decoded unconsciously by the viewer. Mass-media culture 125 The Advertising Medium In this sense, advertising is perhaps the most remarkable mass medium of our age. Just as, when it speaks of a particular object, it potentially glorifies all of them, and in referring to a particular object and brand it speaks in fact of the totality of objects and a world made up in its totality of objects and brands, so, in targeting each consumer, it is targeting them all, and in addressing each individual, it is addressing them all, thus simulating a consumer totality, retribalizing consumers in the McLuhan esque sense of the term, i.e. through a complicity, an immanent, immedi ate collusion at the level of the message, but above all at the level of the medium itself and the code. Every image, every advertisement imposes a consensus - that between all the individuals potentially called upon to decipher it, that is to say, called on, by decoding the message, to subscribe automatically to the code in which it has been couched. It is not, then, its contents, its modes of distribution or its manifest (economic and psychological) objectives which give advertising its mass communication function; it is not its volume, or its real audience (though all these things are important and have a support function), but its very logic as an autonomized medium, i.e. as an object referring not to real objects, not to a real world or a referential dimension, but from one sign to the other, from one object to the other, from one consumer to the other. In the same way, books become means of mass communication if they link the person who reads them with all those who read them (reading a book is not, in that case, a matter of meaning content, but a pure and simple sign of cultural complicity), or if the book/ object links up with others in the same collection, etc. One might analyse how language itself, a symbolic system, reverts to being a mass medium at the level of the brand name and the language of advertising. Mass communication is everywhere defined by this systematization at the level of the technical medium and the code, by the systematic production of messages not from the world, but from the medium itself.18 Pseudo-Event and Neo-Reality We enter here the world of the pseudo-event, of pseudo-history and pseudo-culture which is discussed by Boorstin in The Image. By this he means a world of events, history, culture and ideas not produced from shifting, contradictory, real experience, but produced as artifacts from elements of the code and the technical manipulation of the medium . It is this, and nothing else, which defines all signification whatsoever as consum able. It is this generalization of the substitution of the code for the referential dimension which defines mass-media consumption. The raw event is exchange: it is not material for exchange. It only becomes 'consumable' when filtered, fragmented and reworked by a 126 Mass media, sex and leisure whole industrial chain of production - the mass media - into a finished product, a material of combined, finite signs, analogous to the finished products of industrial production. This is the same operation make-up performs on the face: for real but discordant features, the systematic substitution of a network of abstract but coherent messages made up from technical elements and a code of imposed significations (the code of 'beauty'). We have to beware of interpreting this gigantic enterprise of produc tion of the artificial and the cosmetic, of pseudo-objects and pseudo events, which is invading our daily existence, as a denaturing or falsifying of an 'authentic' content. We can see from all that has just been said that the abduction of meaning, the depoliticization of politics, the deculturing of culture and the desexualization of the body in mass media consumption occurs in a region far beyond the mere 'tendentious' reinterpretation of content. It is in the form that everything has changed: a neo-reality has everywhere been substituted for reality, a neo-reality entirely produced by combining elements of the code. Over the whole span of daily life, a vast process of simulation is taking place, similar in style to the 'simulation models' through which the operational and cybernetic sciences work. A model is 'built' by combining features or elements of reality, and an event, a structure or a future situation is 'played out on' those elements, and tactical conclusions are drawn from this with which to operate on reality. In a controlled scientific procedure, this can serve as an instrument of analysis. In mass communications, it assumes force of reality: reality itself is abolished, obliterated, in favour of this neo-reality of the model, which is given material force by the medium itself. However, let us once again beware of language, which speaks auto matically of the 'false', the 'pseudo' or the 'artificial'. And let us turn again, with Boorstin, to the subject of advertising in order to try to grasp this new logic, which is also a new practice and a new 'mentality'. Beyond the True and the False Advertising has a strategic position in this process. It is the reign of the pseudo-event par excellence. It turns the object into an event. In fact, it constructs it as such by eliminating its objective characteristics. It con structs it as a model, as a spectacular news item. 'Modern advertising began when the advertisement was no longer a spontaneous announce ment and had become "made news" '19 (it is in this way that advertising becomes homogeneous with 'news', which is itself subjected to the same labour of 'myth-making': advertising and 'news' thus constitute a single visual, written, phonic and mythic substance; they succeed each other and alternate in all the media in a way which seems natural to us - they give rise to the same curiosity and the same spectacular/ludic absorption).2o Mass-media culture 127 Journalists and advertisers are mythic operators: they present the object or the event as drama, as fiction. They 'offer it up reinterpreted' and might even, at a pinch, construct it deliberately. If we wish to judge objectively, then, we must apply the categories of myth to them: this latter is neither true nor false and the question is not whether one believes in it or not. That indeed gave rise to two false problems which are endlessly debated: 1 Do advertising executives believe in what they do? (If they did, they could be partly forgiven.) 2 Don't consumers ultimately believe in advertising? (If they did, they would be partly saved.) So, Boorstin argues that advertisers should not be blamed, since the source of the persuasion and mystification was not so much their unscrupulousness as our pleasure at being deceived: it was not so much their desire to seduce, as our desire to be seduced. And he takes the example of Barnum, whose ' great discovery was not how easy it was to deceive the public, but rather, how much the public enjoyed being deceived'.2l This is a seductive hypothesis, but a false one. This whole state of affairs is not based on some sort of reciprocal perversity, some cynical manipulation or collective masochism revolving around the true and the false. The truth is that advertising (like the other mass media) does not deceive us: it is beyond the true and the false, just as fashion is beyond ugliness and beauty and the modern object, in its sign function, is beyond usefulness and uselessness. The problem of the 'veracity' of advertising should be posed as follows: if advertising men really 'lied', they would be easy to unmask. But they do not. And if they do not, this is not because they are too intelligent, but because 'the advertiser 's art . . . consists largely of the art of making persuasive statements which are neither true nor false.122 For the good reason that there is no longer either any original or any real referential dimension and, like all myths and magic formulas, advertis ing is based on a different kind of verification, that of the self-fulfilling prophecy. 'The successful advertiser is the master of a new art: the art of making things true by saying they are so. He is a devotee of the technique of the self-fulfilling prophecy'23 Advertising is prophetic language, in so far as it promotes not learning or understanding, but hope. What it says presupposes no anterior truth (that of the object's use-value), but an ulterior confirmation by the reality of the prophetic sign it sends out. This is how it achieves its end. It turns the object into a pseudo-event, which will become the real event of daily life through the consumer's endorsing its discourse. We can see that the true and the false are indiscernible here, just as they are in political opinion polls where we no longer know whether the real vote is simply ratifying the polls (and it is, then, no longer a real event, but merely a substitute for the polls which, from having been simulations that are 128 Mass media, sex and leisure statistical indicators, have become determining agents of reality) or whether the polls are reflecting public opinion. This is an inextricable tangle. Just as nature imitates art, so daily life ends up being the replica of the model. The mode of 'self-fulfilling prophecy' is the tautological mode. Reality is no longer anything but the model speaking itself. So it is with magical formulas, so it is with simulations and so also with advertising which, among other styles of discourse, plays - for preference - on the tauto logical. Everything in that discourse is a 'metaphor' for one and the same thing: the brand. The expressions 'a better beer' (than what?), 'Lucky Strike, a toasted cigarette' (of course it's toasted; they all are!) merely refer back to a spiral of self-evidence. When Hertz ('the world no. 1 for car hire') says, at the end of a long advertisement, 'Be logical. If you did not find that little something more with us, we would not have reached the position we have today . . . And someone else perhaps would be placing this advertisement', what is this but pure tautology and circular argument? Everywhere, repetition itself functions as efficient causality in this way. Just as molecules are artificially synthesized in certain labor atories, so truth is 'artificially synthesized' here from efficient speech. 'Persil washes whitest' is not a sentence; it is Persil-speak. This and other advertising syntagms do not explain, do not offer any meaning, and are therefore neither true nor false, but they eliminate precisely both mean ing and proof. They substitute an unadorned indicative, which is a repetitive imperative. And that tautology of discourse seeks, as in the magic formula, to induce tautological repetition by the event. The con sumer, by his purchase, will merely ratify the coming to pass of the myth. We might pursue the analysis of advertising discourse further in this direction, and we might also extend it to the various modern media. If we did so, we should see that everywhere, in a radical inversion of the traditional logic of signification and interpretation based on truth and falsehood, it is here the myth (or the model) which finds its event - by means of a production of speech which is now industrialized on the same basis as the production of material goods. 8 The Finest Consumer Object: The Body In the consumer package, there is one object finer, more precious and more dazzling than any other - and even more laden with connotations than the automobile, in spite of the fact that that encapsulates them all. That object is the BODY. Its 'rediscovery', in a spirit of physical and sexual liberation, after a millennial age of puritanism; its omnipresence (specifically the omnipresence of the female body, a fact we shall have to try to explain) in advertising, fashion and mass culture; the hygienic, dietetic, therapeutic cult which surrounds it, the obsession with youth, elegance, virility / femininity, treatments and regimes, and the sacrificial practices attaching to it all bear witness to the fact that the body has today become an object of salvation. It has literally taken over that moral and ideological function from the soul. Unremitting propaganda reminds us that, in the words of the old hymn, we have only one body and it has to be saved.1 For centuries, there was a relentless effort to convince people they had no bodies (though they were never really convinced); today, there is a relentless effort to convince them of their bodies. There is something strange about this. Is not the body the most obvious of things? It seems not. The body is a cultural fact. Now, in any culture whatsoever, the mode of organiza tion of the relation to the body reflects the mode of organization of the relation to things and of social relations. In a capitalist society, the general status of private property applies also to the body, to the way we operate socially with it and the mental representation we have of it. In the traditional order - in the case of the peasant, for example - there was no narcissistic investment or spectacular perception of his body, but an instrumental! magical vision, induced by the labour process and the relation to nature. What we want to show is that the current structures of production/ consumption induce in the subject a dual practice, linked to a split (but profoundly interdependent) representation of his/her own body: the representation of the body as capital and as fetish (or consumer object). In both cases, it is important that, far from the body being denied or left out of account, there is deliberate investment in it (in the two senses, economic and psychical, of the term). 130 Mass media, sex and leisure The Secret Keys to Your Body A fine example of this managed reappropriation of the body is provided by EIle, in an article entitled 'The secret keys to your body which unlock the door to complex-free living' . 'Your body is both your outer limit and your sixth sense,' the article begins, and it assumes a serious air by recounting the psycho-genesis of the appropriation of the body and its image: 'At around six months, you began to perceive, as yet very obscurely, that you had a distinct body.' After an allusion to the mirror-stage ('psychologists call this . . . ') and a timid allusion to erogenous zones ('Freud says that . . . '), it comes to the central point: 'Are you at ease in your body?' Right away, in comes Brigitte Bardot (BB): she 'is at ease in her body'. 'Everything about her is beautiful: her neck, her back, particularly the small of the back . . . BB's secret? She really inhabits her body. She is like a little animal who precisely fills up her dress.' (Does she inhabit her body or her dress? Which of these, the body or the dress, is her second home? This is precisely the point: she wears her body like a dress, and this makes 'inhabiting' a fashion effect, a 'package' effect, and relates it to a ludic principle which is further reinforced by the 'little animal' reference.) If, in the past, it was 'the soul which clothed the body', today it is the skin which clothes it, though not the skin as irruption of nudity (and, hence, of desire), but as prestige garment and second home, as sign and as fashion reference (and therefore substitutable for the dress without change of meaning, as can be seen in the current exploitation of nudity in the theatre and elsewhere, where, in spite of the false sexual pathos, it appears as one more term in the fashion paradigm). Let us return to our text. 'You have to be in touch with yourself, you have to learn to read your body' (if you don't, you are anti-BB). Lie on the ground and stretch out your arms. Now run the middle finger of your right hand very slowly along that invisible line which runs from the ring finger right along the arm to the crook of the elbow and the armpit. You'll find the same line on your legs. These are lines of sensitivity. This is your carte du tendre.2 There are other lines of tendresse: along the spinal column, on the nape of the neck, the stomach, the shoulders . . . If you do not know them, then repression occurs in your body, as it does in your psyche . . . The territories of the body which your sensitivity does not inhabit, which your thinking does not visit, are ill-favoured areas . . . The circulation there is poor; there is a lack of muscle tone. Or, alternatively, cellulite[!) tends to settle there once and for all. In other words: if you don't make your bodily devotions, if you sin by omission, you will be punished. Everything that ails you comes from being culpably irresponsible towards yourself (your own salvation). Quite apart from the atmosphere of singular moral terrorism which infuses this carte du tendre (and which equates with puritan terrorism, except that in this case it is no longer God punishing you, but your own body - a suddenly maleficent, repressive agency which takes its revenge The body 131 if you are not gentle with it), one can see how this discourse, under the guise of reconciling everyone with their own body, does in fact reintro duce, between the subject and the objectivized body as threatening double, the same relations which are those of social life, the same determinations which are those of social relations: blackmail, repression, persecution syndrome, conjugal neurosis (the same women who read this will read a few pages further on that if they are not affectionate to their husbands, they will bear the responsibility for the failure of their marriages). Apart, then, from this latent terrorism, directed in Elle more particularly at women, what is interesting is the suggestion that one should revert back into one's own body and invest it narcissistically 'from the inside', not in any sense to get to know it in depth, but, by a wholly fetishistic and spectacular logic, to form it into a smoother, more perfect, more functional object for the outside world. This narcissistic relation - it is a managed narcissism, operating on the body as in colonized virgin 'territory', 'affectionately' [tendrement] exploring the body like a deposit to be mined in order to extract from it the visible signs of happiness, health, beauty, and the animality which triumphs in the marketplace of fashion - finds its mystical expression in the readers' confessions which follow: 'I was discovering my body. I could feel it in all its purity.' And, even better: 'It was as though I was being hugged by my body. I began to love it. And, loving it, I wanted to care for it with the same affection I felt for my children.' What is significant is this regressive involution of affectivity into the body-as-child, the body-as-trinket - inexhaustible metaphor of a penis cherished, cradled and . . . castrated. In this sense, the body, become the finest object of solicitude, monopol izes for itself all so-called normal affectivity (towards other real persons), without, however, taking on a value of its own, since, in this process of affective rerouting [detournement], any other object can, by the same fetishistic logic, play this role. The body is simply the finest of these psychically possessed, manipulated and consumed objects. But the main thing is that this narcissistic reinvestment, orchestrated as a mystique of liberation and accomplishment, is in fact always simultaneously an investment of an efficient, competitive, economic type. The body 'reappropriated' in this way is reappropriated first to meet 'capitalist' objectives: in other words, where it is invested, it is invested in order to produce a yield. The body is not reappropriated for the autonomous ends of the subject, but in terms of a normative principle of enjoyment and hedonistic profitability, in terms of an enforced instru mentality that is indexed to the code and the norms of a society of production and managed consumption. In other words, one manages one's body; one handles it as one might handle an inheritance; one manipulates it as one of the many signifiers of social status. The woman who said she 'wanted to care for it with the same affection [she] felt for [her] children' immediately adds: 'I began to visit beauticians . . . The people who saw me after that crisis found me happier, better look- 132 Mass media, sex and leisure ing.' 'Recuperated' as an instrument of enjoyment and an indicator of prestige, the body is then subjected to a labour of investment (solicitude, obsession) which, once the myth of liberation that acts as cover is peeled away, doubtless represents a more profoundly alienated labour than the exploitation of the body as labour power.3 Functional Beauty In this long process of sacralization of the body as exponential value, of the functional body - that is to say, the body which is no longer 'flesh' as in the religious conception, or labour power as in industrial logic, but is taken up again in its materiality (or its 'visible' ideality) as narcissistic cult object or element of social ritual and tactics - beauty and eroticism are two major leitmotivs. They are inseparable and the two together institute this new ethics of the relation to the body. Though valid for both men and women, they are, nevertheless, differentiated into feminine and masculine poles. The two opposing models - the basic elements of which are largely interchange able - might be termed phryneism4 and athleticism. Still, the feminine model has a kind of priority: it is this model which, to some extent, functions as the template of this new ethics. And it is not by chance that it is in Elle that we find the type of material we have analysed above.s For women, beauty has become an absolute, religious imperative. Being beautiful is no longer an effect of nature or a supplement to moral qualities. It is the basic, imperative quality of those who take the same care of their faces and figures as they do of their souls. It is a sign, at the level of the body, that one is a member of the elect, just as success is such a sign in business. And, indeed, in their respective magazines, beauty and success are accorded the same mystical foundation: for women, it is sensitivity, exploring and evoking 'from the inside' all the parts of the body; for the entrepreneur, it is the adequate intuition of all the possibil ities of the market. A sign of election and salvation: the Protestant ethic is not far away here. And it is true that beauty is such an absolute imperative only because it is a form of capital. Let us take this same logic a little further. The ethics of beauty, which is the very ethics of fashion, may be defined as the reduction of all concrete values - the 'use-values' of the body (energetic, gestural, sexual) - to a single functional 'exchange-value', which itself alone, in its abstraction, encapsulates the idea of the glorious, fulfilled body, the idea of desire and pleasure [jouissance], and of course thereby also denies and forgets them in their reality and in the end simply peters out into an exchange of signs. For beauty is nothing more than sign material being exchanged. It functions as sign-value. That is why we can say that the beauty imperative is one of the modalities of the functional imperative, this being valid for objects as much as it is for women (and men), the The body 133 beautician every woman has become being the counterpart of the designer and stylist in the business sphere. Moreover, if we look at the dominant principles of industrial aesthetics (functionalism), we can see that they apply generally to the charter for beauty: BB feeling 'at ease in her body' or 'precisely fill[ing] up her dress' is part of this same pattern of the 'harmonious marriage of function and form'. Functional Eroticism Alongside beauty, as we have just defined it, sexuality everywhere orientates the 'rediscovery' and consumption of the body today. The beauty imperative, which is an imperative of turning the body to advantage by way of narcissistic reinvestment, involves the erotic as sexual foil. We have clearly to distinguish the erotic as a generalized dimension of exchange in our societies from sexuality properly so called. We have to distinguish the erotic body - substrate of the exchanged signs of desire - from the body as site of fantasy and abode of desire. In the drive /body, the fantasy /body, the individual structure of desire predom inates. In the 'eroticized' body, it is the social function of exchange which predominates. In this sense, the erotic imperative - which, like courtesy or so many other social rituals, is mediated by an instrumental code of signs - is merely (like the aesthetic imperative in beauty) a variant or metaphor of the functional imperative. The Elle woman is 'hot' with that same heat, that same warmth one finds in modern furniture: it is an 'atmospheric' heat. It no longer comes from intimacy and sensuality, but from calculated sexual signification. Sensuality is heat. This sexuality, for its part, is hot and cold, like the play of warm and cold colours in a 'functional' interior. It has the same 'whiteness' as the enveloping forms of 'stylized', 'dressed-up' modern objects. But it is also not a 'frigidity', as has been suggested, since frigidity still implies a sexual resonance of violation. The fashion model is not frigid: she is an abstraction. The fashion model's body is no longer an object of desire, but a functional object, a forum of signs in which fashion and the erotic are mingled. It is no longer a synthesis of gestures, even if fashion photo graphy puts all its artistry into re-creating gesture and naturalness by a process of simulation.6 It is no longer, strictly speaking, a body, but a shape. This is where all modern censors are misled (or are content to be misled): the fact is that in advertising and fashion naked bodies (both women's and men's) refuse the status of flesh, of sex, of finality of desire, instrumentalizing rather the fragmented parts of the body in a gigantic process of sublimation, of denying the body in its very evocation? Just as the erotic is never in desire but in signs, so the functional beauty of the fashion models is never in their expressions but in their 134 Mass media, sex and leisure 'figures'. Irregularity or ugliness would bring out a meaning again: they are excluded. For beauty here is wholly in abstraction, in emptiness, in ecstatic absence and transparency. This disembodiment is ultimately encapsulated in the gaze. These fascinating/fascinated, sunken eyes, this objectless gaze - both oversignification of desire and total absence of desire - are beautiful in their empty erection, in the exaltation of their censorship. That is their functionality. Medusa eyes, eyes themselves turned to stone, pure signs. Thus, all along the unveiled, exalted body, in these spectacular eyes, eyes ringed by fashion, not by pleasure, it is the very meaning of the body, the truth of the body which vanishes in a hypnotic process. It is to this extent that the body - particularly the female body and, most particularly, the body of that absolute model, the fashion mannequin - constitutes itself as an object that is the equivalent to the other sexless and functional objects purveyed in advertising. Pleasure Principle and Productive Force Conversely, the least of objects, implicitly cathected on the pattern of the female body / object, is fetishized in this same way. Hence the generalized imbuing of the whole field of 'consumption' by eroticism. This is not a fashion in the lighter sense of the term; it is the specific, rigorous logic of fashion. Bodies and objects form a network of homogeneous signs which may, on the basis of the abstraction we have just discussed, exchange their significations (this is, properly speaking, their 'exchange-value') and 'show each other off [se faire valoir] mutually'. This homology between bodies and objects takes us into the deep mechan isms of managed consumption. If the 'rediscovery of the body' is always the rediscovery of the body/object in the generalized context of other objects, one can see how easy, logical and necessary a transition there is from the functional appropriation of the body to the appropriation of goods and objects in shopping. And we know, indeed, to what extent the modern eroticism and aesthetics of the body are steeped in an environ ment teeming with products, gadgets and accessories in an atmosphere of total sophistication. From hygiene to make-up (not forgetting suntans, exercise and the many 'liberations' of fashion), the rediscovery of the body takes place initially through objects. It even seems that the only drive that is really liberated is the drive to buy. We may recall here the example of the woman who, having suddenly fallen madly in love with her body, dashes off to the beauty parlour. And there is also the more common, opposite case: all those women who go in for all the eaux de toilette, massages and treatments in the hope of 'rediscovering their bodies'. The theoretical equivalence between bodies and objects as signs is what in fact makes possible the magical equation: 'Buy - and you will be at ease in your body.' This is where all the psycho-functionality analysed above assumes its The body 135 full economic and ideological meaning. The body sells products. Beauty sells products. Eroticism sells products. And this is not the least of the reasons which, in the last instance, orientate the entire historical process of the 'liberation of the body'. It is the same with the body as it is with labour power. It has to be 'liberated, emancipated' to be able to be exploited rationally for productivist ends. Just as freedom to dispose of oneself and personal interest - the formal principles of the individual freedom of the worker - have to operate for labour power to be able to transform itself into the demand for wages and exchange-value, so the individual has to rediscover his body and invest it narcissistically - the formal principle of pleasure - for the force of desire to be able to transform itself into a demand for rationally manipulable objects/signs. The individ ual has to take himself as object, as the finest of objects, as the most precious exchange material, for an economic process of profit generation to be established at the level of the deconstructed body, of deconstructed sexuality. Modern Strategy of the Body However, this productivist objective, this economic process of profit generation, by which the social structures of production are generalized at the level of the body, is doubtless still secondary to the goals of integration and social control set in place by the whole mythological and psychological apparatus centred around the body. In the history of ideologies, those relating to the body long had an offensive, critical value against the ideologies of the spiritualist, puritan, moralizing type which were centred on the soul or some other non material principle. Since the Middle Ages, all heresies have been to some extent claims of the flesh, the advance resurrection of bodies against the rigid dogma of the Churches (this is the 'Adamical' tendency, which reappeared repeatedly, always to be condemned by orthodoxy). Since the eighteenth century, sensualist, empiricist, materialist philosophy has demolished the traditional spiritualist dogmas. It would be interesting to make a detailed analysis of the very long process of historical disintegra tion of that fundamental value called the soul, around which the whole individual scheme of salvation was organized and also, of course, the whole process of social integration. This long desacralization and secu larization in favour of the body has run through the whole of the Western era: the values of the body have been subversive values, sources of the most acute ideological contradiction. But how do matters stand today when these values are largely uncontested and have gained acceptance as a new ethic (there is much to be said on this subject: we are now, rather, in a phase in which the puritan and hedonist ideologies are concertinaed, their themes intermingling at every level)? We can see that the body today, apparently triumphant, instead of still constituting a living, contradictory force, a force for 'demystification', has quite simply 136 Mass media, sex and leisure taken over from the soul as mythic instance, as dogma and as salvational scheme. Its 'discovery', which for many centuries represented a critique of the sacred, a call for greater freedom, truth and emancipation - in short a battling for humanity, against God - today occurs as an act of resacralization. The cult of the body no longer stands in contradiction to the cult of the soul: it is the successor to that cult and heir to its ideological function. As Norman O. Brown says in Life against Death: 'We must not be misled by the flat antinomy of the sacred and the secular, and interpret as "secularization" what is only a metamorphosis of the sacred. '8 The material evidence of the 'liberated' body (though, as we have seen, liberated as sign/ object and censored in its subversive truth as desire, not only in athletic activity and hygiene, but also in eroticism) must not be allowed to deceive us here: it merely expresses the supplanting of an outdated ideology - that of the soul, which is inadequate for a developed productivist system and incapable now of ensuring ideological integra tion - by a more functional modern ideology which, in all essentials, preserves the individualistic value system and the social structures connected with it. And it even reinforces these, establishing them on an almost permanent basis, since it substitutes for the transcendence of the soul the total immanence, the spontaneous self-evidence of the body. Now, that self-evidence is false evidence. The body as instituted by modern mythology is no more material than the soul. Like the soul, it is an idea or, rather - since the term 'idea' does not mean much - it is a hypostasized part-object, a double privileged and invested as such. It has become, as the soul was in its time, the privileged substrate of objectivi zation - the guiding myth of an ethic of consumption. We can see how intimately the body is involved in the goals of production as (economic) support, as principle of the managed (psychological) integration of the individual, and as (political) strategy of social control. Is the Body Feminine? Let us come back to the question we set aside at the beginning of this chapter: that of the role which falls to woman and the female body as privileged vehicle of Beauty, Sexuality and managed Narcissism. For if it is clear that this process of reduction of the body to aesthetic/erotic exchange-value affects both the male and the female (we have suggested two terms for this, athleticism and phryneism, phryneism being defined roughly as the woman of Elle and the fashion magazines, masculine athleticism finding its wider model in the athleticism of the executive, a model presented everywhere in advertising, films, mass literature: bright eyes, broad shoulders, lithe muscles and a sports car. This athletic model also encompasses sexual athleticism: the high-ranking executive of the Le Monde small ads is also Playboy man. But in the end, however much of a The body 137 part is played by the masculine model9 or the transitional, hermaphro ditic models, the 'young' forming a kind of third sex, the site of a 'polymorphous, perverse sexuality'),l0 it is woman who orchestrates or rather around whom is orchestrated this great Aesthetic/ Erotic Myth. We have to find an explanation for this which is not simply of the archetypal sort along the lines: 'Sexuality is the sphere of Woman because she represents Nature, etc.' Admittedly, in the historical era we are dealing with here, woman has been confused with maleficent sexuality and condemned as such. But that moral/ sexual condemnation is entirely underpinned by a social servitude: woman and the body have shared the same servitude, the same relegation, throughout Western history. The sexual definition of woman is historical in origin: the repression of the body and the exploitation of woman were carried out in the same spirit, every exploited (and therefore threatening) category having auto matically to assume a sexual definition. Blacks are 'sexualized' for the same reason, not because they might be said to be 'closer to Nature', but because they are exploited and kept in serfdom. The repressed, sub limated sexuality of a whole civilization inevitably combines with the category whose social repression and subjection form the very basis of that culture. Now, just as women and bodies were bound together in servitude, the emancipation of woman and the emancipation of the body are logically and historically linked (for related reasons, the emancipation of the young is contemporaneous with them). But we can see that this simul taneous emancipation occurs without the basic ideological confusion between woman and sexuality being removed - the legacy of puritanism still bears down on us with all its force. Indeed, only now does it assume its full scope since women, once subjugated as a sex, are today 'liberated' as a sex - to the extent that we see this almost irreversible confusion now deepening in all its forms, since it is in so far as she 'liberates' herself that woman becomes more and more merged with her body. But we have seen in what conditions this takes place: it is, in fact, the apparently liberated woman who merges with the apparently liberated body. We may say both of women and the body - as we may say of young people and all the categories whose emancipation constitutes the leitmotiv of mod ern democratic society - that all the things in whose name they are 'emancipated' (sexual freedom, eroticism, play, etc.) form themselves into systems of 'tutelary' values, 'irresponsible' values, simultaneously orientating consumer behaviour and behaviours of social relegation, with the very exaltation and excess of honour that surrounds them standing in the way of real economic and social responsibility. Women, young people and the body - the emergence of all of which after thousands of years of servitude and forgetting in effect consti tutes the most revolutionary potentiality - and, therefore, the most fundamental risk for any social order whatever - are integrated and recuperated as a 'myth of emancipation'. Women are given Woman to 138 Mass media, sex and leisure consume, the young are given the Young and, in this formal and narcissistic emancipation, their real liberation is successfully averted. Or alternatively, by assigning Revolt to the Young ('Young = revolt'), two birds are killed with one stone: the revolt diffusely present throughout society is conjured away by allotting it to a particular category and that category is neutralized by confining it to a particular role - revolt. An admirable vicious circle of managed 'emancipation', which we also find applied in the case of women: by confusing women and sexual libera tion, each is neutralized by the other. Women 'consume themselves' through sexual liberation, and sexual liberation 'is consumed' through women. There is no play on words here. One of the basic mechanisms of consumption is this formal autonomization of groups, classes and castes (and the individual) by and through the formal autonomization of systems of signs or roles. There is no question here of denying the 'real' development of the status of women and young people as social categories: they are in fact freer; they vote, have rights, work more and work earlier. Similarly, it would be pointless to deny the objective importance now accorded to the body, to the care of it and its pleasures, to the 'added element of body and sexuality' which the average individual enjoys today. We are far from the 'ideal release' Rimbaud spoke of, but let us accept, nonetheless, that there is in all this a greater freedom of manoeuvre for, and a greater positive integration of, women and young people, and bodily problems. What we are saying is that this relative, concrete emancipation, because it is merely the emancipation of women, young people and the body as categories immediately indexed to a functional practice, is accompanied by a mythical transcendence or, rather, itself divides to produce a mythical transcendence, an objectivization as myth. The emancipation of some women (and - why not? - the relative emancipation of all) is merely to some extent the secondary gain, the spin-off from - and the cover for - that immense strategic operation which consists in containing in the idea of woman and her body the whole social peril of sexual liberation, in confining the peril of women's liberation to the idea of sexual liberation (in eroticism), in calling down on to the Woman/Object all the perils of the social liberation of womenY The Medical Cult: 'Fitness' The predominant relation to health is derived from the current way of relating to the body, which is not so much a relation to one's own body as to the functional, 'personalized' body. When it is mediated by an instrumental representation of the body, that relation can be defined as a general function of maintaining the body's equilibrium. When mediated by a representation of the body as prestige good, it becomes a functional status demand. It then enters into a competitive logic and expresses itself The body 139 in a virtually unlimited demand for medical, surgical and pharmaceut ical services - a compulsive demand linked to the narcissistic investment of the body / (part) object and a status demand linked to the processes of personalization and social mobility; a demand which, at any event, bears only a distant relation to that 'right to health' which is a modernist extension of human rights, complementary to the rights to liberty and property. Health today is not so much a biological imperative linked to survival as a social imperative linked to status. It is not so much a basic 'value' as a form of prestige display. In the mystique of such display, fitness stands next to beauty. Their signs are exchanged within the framework of personalization, that anxious, perfectionist manipulation of the sign function of the body. This corporeal syndrome of display, which links narcissism and social prestige, can also be very clearly seen in inverted form in the current very widespread fact, which must be regarded as one of the essential elements of modern ethics, that any loss of prestige, any social or psychological reversal is immediately somatized. It is, therefore, superficial to claim that the use of medicine (usage of doctors) has been 'desacralized' and that because people go more often and more freely to their doctors, because they use and abuse this democratized social provision in a complex-free way (which is not true), they are coming closer to an 'objective' practice of health and medicine. 'Democratically consumed' medicine has lost nothing of its sacredness and its magical functionality. But it is clearly not that traditional func tionality which attached, through the person of the priest-healer, the sorcerer and the medicine-man, to operation on the practical body, on the instrumental body threatened by outside hazards, such as still figures in the 'uncultivated' peasant vision, in which the body is not interiorized as a personal, 'personalized' value. In that vision, one does not achieve one's salvation or mark one's status through one's body. It is, rather, a tool of one's labour and mana, that is to say, efficient force. If it gets out of sorts, the doctor restores the body's mana. This type of magic and the corresponding status of the doctor is tending to disappear. But it is not giving way, in the modern 'vision', to an objective representation of the body. It is giving way to two complementary modalities: narcissistic investment and prestige display: a 'psychical' dimension and a status dimension. It is in these two directions that the status of the doctor and of health is being reworked. And it is only now, through the 'rediscovery' and the individual sacralization of the body, that medicality is assuming its full scope (just as it was only with the mythic crystallization of the 'individual soul' that clericality as a transcendent institution really took off) . Primitive 'religions' know no 'sacrament'; they are collective practices. It was with the individualization of the principles of salvation (mainly in Christian spirituality) that sacraments and the 'officiants' in charge of 140 Mass media, sex and leisure them were established. It was with the even more thoroughgoing indi vidualization of conscience that individual confession, the sacrament par excellence, was instituted. Making all due allowance and wholly aware of the dangers of the comparison, it seems to me to be the same with the body and medicine: it is with generalized individual 'somatization' (in the broadest, non-clinical sense of the term), with the body's becoming an object of prestige and salvation and a fundamental value, that the doctor becomes a 'confessor ', a 'source of absolution' and an 'officiant', and the medical profession settles into the overprivileged social status which it currently enjoys. All kinds of sacrificial behaviours of auto-solicitude and malign exor cism, of gratification and repression, converge more than ever on the privatized, personalized body - a whole host of secondary, 'irrational' purchases to no practical, therapeutic end. Much of this is consumption which even transgresses economic imperatives (half of the money spent on medicines is on non-prescription items, and this goes even for those covered by the welfare system). What prompts such behaviour other than the deep-seated belief that it has to cost you something (and it is enough that it costs you something) for health to be yours in exchange? This is ritual, sacrificial consumption rather than medication. Thus we see a compulsive demand for medicines among the 'lower ' classes and a demand for the doctor among the better-off, but whether the doctor is seen by the former as a dispenser of material signs and goods or by the latter more as the 'psychoanalyst of the body', medicine and doctors have a cultural virtue rather than a therapeutic function, and they are consumed as 'virtual' mana. And that consumption takes place accord ing to a thoroughly modern ethics which, by contrast with the traditional form, which demanded that the body should serve, enjoins all individuals to put themselves in the service of their own bodies (d. the Elle article) . One has a duty to take care of oneself as one has to cultivate one's mind: it is, in a sense, a mark of respectability. The modern woman is both the vestal and the manager of her own body; she takes care to keep it beautiful and competitive. The functional and the sacred are inextricably intermingled here. And the doctor.receives both the respect due to the expert and the reverence due to the priest. The Obsession with Slimness: The 'Figure' The obsession with looking after one's figure can be understood in terms of the same categorical imperative. There is in no sense, of course, any natural affinity between beauty and slimness (one only has to glance at other cultures to see this). Fat and obesity have also been regarded as beautiful in other places and at other times. But this imperative, uni versal, democratic beauty inscribed as a right and a duty on the pediment of consumer society, is indissociable from slimness. Beauty cannot The body 141 be fat or slim, heavy-limbed or slender as it could in a traditional definition based on the harmony of forms. It can only be slim and slender, according to its current definition as a combinatorial logic of signs, governed by the same algebraic economy as the functionality of objects or the elegance of a diagram. It even tends, somewhat, towards the scrawny and emaciated, on the lines of the models and mannequins that are simultaneously the negation of the flesh and the exaltation of fashion. This may seem a strange state of affairs, for if we take as one definition of consumption that it is a generalization of the combinatorial processes of fashion, we know that fashion can play on anything, on opposite terms: it can play without distinction on the old and the new, the 'beautiful' and the 'ugly' (in their classical definitions), the moral and the immoral. But it cannot play on the fat and the thin. There is something akin to an absolute limit here. Might it be that in a society of overconsumption (of food), slenderness becomes a distinctive sign in itself? Even if slimness acts as such a sign in relation to all previous cultures and generations and to the peasant and 'lower ' classes, we know there are no signs which are distinctive in themselves, but only opposing formal signs (old and new, long and short (skirts), etc.) which follow one upon the other as distinctive signs, and alternate in such a way as to bring fresh grist to the mill, without any one of these definitively squeezing out the other. Now, paradoxically, in the area of the 'figure', an area which is par excellence that of fashion, the fashion cycle no longer operates. There has to be something more fundamental than distinction. Something which must be linked to the very mode of complicity with our own bodies which we have seen being established in the contemporary era. The 'liberation' of the body has the effect of constituting it as an object of solicitude. Now that solicitude, like everything which has to do with the body and the relation to the body, is ambivalent. It is never solely positive and overall, indeed, it is negative. The body is always 'liberated' as simultaneous object of this dual solicitude.12 As a consequence, the immense process of solicitude of the 'gratifying' kind, a process we have described as the instituting of the body in its modern form, is accom panied by an equal and equally substantial investment of repressive solicitude. It is this repressive solicitude which is expressed in all the modern collective obsessions relating to the body. Hygiene, in all its forms, with its fantasies of sterility, asepsis, prophylaxis or, by contrast, of promis cuity, contamination, pollution - tending to conjure away the 'organic' body and, in particular, the functions of excretion and secretion - aims at a negative definition of the body, by elimination, as though it were a smooth, faultless, sexless object, cut off from all external aggression and thereby protected from itself. The obsession with hygiene is not, how ever, the direct heir to puritan morality. That morality denied, reproved and repressed the body. In a more subtle way, contemporary ethics 142 Mass media, sex and leisure sanctifies it in its hygienic abstraction, in all its purity as a disincarnated signifier. But a signifier of what? Of forgotten, censored desire. This is why the (phobic, obsessional) hygienic compulsion is never far away. Overall, however, the preoccupation with hygiene founds a morality based not on pathos, but on play: it 'eludes' deep fantasies in favour of a superficial, cutaneous religion of the body. Taking care of, being 'loving' towards the body, that morality prevents any collusion between the body and desire. It is closer, all in all, to the sacrificial techniques of 'prepara tion' of the body, to the ludic techniques of control - not repression - of primitive societies, than it is to the repressive ethics of the puritan era. Much more than in hygiene, it is in the ascetic practice of 'dieting' that the aggressive drive against the body is to be seen, a drive 'liberated' at the same time as the body itself. Ancient societies had their ritual fasting practices. As collective practices linked to the celebration of festivals (before or after - fasting before Communion - fasting in Advent - Lent after Mardi Gras), it was their function to siphon off all this diffuse aggressive drive against the body (the whole ambivalence of the relation to food and 'consumption') and channel it into collective observance. Now, these various institutions of fasting and mortification have fallen into disuse as so many archaisms incompatible with the total, democratic liberation of the body. Clearly, our consumer society can no longer bear any restrictive norm and even excludes such a norm on principle. However, in liberating the body in all its potentialities for satisfaction, it thought it was liberating a naturally pre-existing harmonious relation ship between man and his body. It turns out that this was a fantastic mistake. The whole antagonistic aggressive drive liberated at the same time, now no longer canalized by social institutions, surges back today into the very heart of the universal solicitude for the body. It is that drive which fuels the veritable enterprise of self-repression now affecting one third of the adult populations of the overdeveloped countries (and 50 per cent of women; an American study has shown that 300 adolescent girls out of 446 are on a diet). It is this drive which, above and beyond the (once again undeniable) determinations of fashion, is stoking up this irrepressible, irrational self-destructive frenzy in which beauty and elegance, which were the original goals, are now merely alibis for a daily, obsessive disciplinary exercise. In a total turnabout, the body becomes that menacing object which has to be watched over, reduced and mortified for 'aesthetic' ends, while one's eyes are kept riveted through out on the skinny, emaciated models of Vogue, in whom one can decipher all the inverted aggressiveness of an affluent society towards its own body triumphalism, all the vehement denial of its own principles. This meeting of beauty and repression in the cult of the figure (in which the body, in its materiality and sexuality, basically has no part any more, simply functioning now as the physical medium for two logics wholly removed from the logic of satisfaction: the fashion imperative, a principle of social organization, and the death imperative, a principle of The body 143 psychical organization) is one of the great paradoxes of our 'civilization'. The mystique of the 'figure' and the fascination with slimness have such a profound impact only because they are forms of violence, because in them the body is literally sacrificed - both fixed in its perfection and violently vitalized as in sacrifice. All the contradictions of this society are encapsulated here, at the level of the body. 'With its remarkable action', Scandi-Sauna will bring you a slimmer waistline - better hips, thighs and ankles - a flat stomach - regenerated tissues - firmed-up flesh - smooth skin - a new figure. 'After three months of using Scandi-Sauna . . . I lost those extra pounds and, at the same time, acquired remarkable physical fitness and mental harmony.' In the USA, 'low-calorie foods', artificial sweeteners, fat-free butters and diets launched with great advertising campaigns make fortunes for their backers and manufacturers. It is estimated that 30 million Americans either are, or believe themselves to be, obese. The Sex-Exchange Standard Automatic sexualization of everyday essentials: 'Whether the article to be pitched out into commercial space is a brand of tyres or a new model of coffin, the aim is always to hit the potential client in the same spot: below the belt. Eroticism for the elite; pornography for the masses' (Jacques Sternberg, Toi ma nuit, Losfeld). Naked theatre (Broadway: Oh Calcutta!): the authorities licensed the performances on condition that there were neither erections nor penetra tion on stage. First pornography fair at Copenhagen - 'Sex 69': this was a 'fair ' and not a festival, as the newspapers had reported. In other words, it was essentially a commercial event, designed to enable the manufacturers of pornographic material to conquer new markets. It seems that the Christiansborg leaders,B generously concerned to remove all mystery from this field - and, hence, much of its attraction - by bringing down the barriers, had underestimated the financial side of the business. A number of smart people, on the lookout for profitable investments, were not slow to grasp what an opportunity the intensive exploitation of this sector could represent for them, now that it was part of the open market. Having rapidly organized themselves, they are now, as a consequence, developing pornography into one of Denmark's most profitable indus tries (source: the press). Not a millimetre of erogenous zone has been left unexploited (J.-F. Held). The talk everywhere is of 'sexual explosion', of the 'escalation of eroti cism'. Sexuality is 'at the forefront' of consumer society, spectacularly overdetermining the entire signifying field of mass communications. All that is presented there has about it a conspicuous sexual vibrato. 144 Mass media, sex and leisure Everything offered for consumption has a sexual coefficient. At the same time, of course, it is sexuality itself which is offered for consumption. Here again we have the same operation as we adverted to with regard to youth and revolt, women and sexuality: by indexing sexuality in an increasingly systematic way to commercialized and industrialized ob jects and messages, these latter are diverted from their objective ration ality, while sexuality itself is diverted from its explosive finality. Social and sexual change thus tread well-beaten paths which have already been carefully explored by 'cultural' and promotional eroticism. Admittedly, this explosion, this proliferation is contemporaneous with deep changes in the relations between the sexes and in individual relations to the body and sex. It is, even more, an expression of the real and in many respects new-found - urgency of sexual problems. But it is not certain either that this sexual 'display' of modern society is not a gigantic cover for these very problems, or that, by giving them system atic 'official status', it does not lend them a deceptive appearance of 'freedom', which masks the profound contradictions involved. We can sense that this eroticization is excessive and that there is meaning in the excessiveness. Is it merely the expression of a crisis of desublimation, of a relaxation of traditional taboos? In that case, we might imagine that once a certain saturation level had been reached, once the cravings of the heirs of puritanism had been satisfied, liberated sexuality would recover its equilibrium, having now detached itself, and achieved its independence, from the productivist, industrial spiral. One might also take the view that the escalation, once begun, will continue like that of GNP, the conquest of space or innovation in fashion and objects, and for the same reasons (J.-F. Held). In this perspective, sexuality is once and for all part of the unlimited process of production and marginal differentiation, because it is the very logic of that system which has 'liberated' it as erotic system and individual and collective consumption function. Let us distance ourselves here from any kind of moral censorship: we are not speaking of 'corruption' and we know, in any case, that the worst sexual 'corruption' may be a sign of vitality, richness, emancipation: it is, in that case, revolutionary and marks the historical flowering of a new class conscious of its triumph. The Italian Renaissance was an age of this kind. Such sexuality is a mark of rejoicing. However, it is not this sexuality, but its spectre which resurfaces - as a sign of death - when a society is in decline. The decomposition of a class or a society always ends in the individual dispersal of its members and (among other things) in a veritable contagion of sexuality, both as individual motive and as social ambience. The end of the ancien regime was one such period. It seems that a seriously splintered collectivity, because it is cut off from its past and lacks any imagining of a future, re-enters an almost pure world of drives, mingling in the same feverish dissatisfaction the immediate determinations of profit and sex. The disturbance of social relations, and The body 145 the precarious collusion and ferocious competition which create the ambience of the economic world, affect the nerves and the senses. Sexuality, ceasing to be a factor of cohesion and shared elation, becomes an individual frenzy for profit. Everyone is obsessed with it and thereby isolated. And, in a characteristic feature, as it is exacerbated, it also becomes anxious about itself. It is no longer shame, modesty or guilt, those marks of the centuries of puritanism, which weigh upon it: indeed, these gradually vanish as the official norms and prohibitions disappear. It is the individual agency of repression, internalized censorship, which penalizes this sexual liberation. Censorship is no longer socially insti tuted (religiously, morally, juridically) in formal opposition to sexuality; it now plunges deep into the individual unconscious and feeds on the same sources as sexuality. All the sexual gratifications which surround one now bear within them their own continual censorship. There is no longer any repression (or there is less); but censorship has become a function of everyday life. 'Nous implanterons une debauche inouie' said Rimbaud in his 'Villes'.14 But sexual liberation and the escalation of eroticism have nothing to do with the 'derangement of all the senses' [dereglement de tous les sens] .15 The orchestrated derangement and muted anxiety with which it is imbued, far from 'changing life', merely make up a collective ambience in which sexuality in fact becomes a private affair, that is to say, one that is fiercely self-conscious, narcissistic and tired of itself - the very ideology of a system which it crowns in terms of mores and in which it is a political cog. For, above and beyond the advertisers, who 'play' the sexuality 'card' so as to sell more products, there is the existing social order, which 'plays the card of' sexual liberation (even if it condemns it morally) against the threatening dialectic of the totality. Symbols and Fantasies in Advertising This generalized censorship which defines consumed sexuality must not, above all, be confused with moral censorship. It does not penalize conscious sexual behaviours in the name of conscious imperatives. This is, indeed, a field in which apparent permissiveness is de rigueur; everything conspires towards it and even the perversions can be freely engaged in (these things are all relative, of course, but this is the general trend). The censorship which our society, in its sexual hyperaesthesia, sets in place is more subtle: it operates at the level of fantasies themselves and the symbolic function. This kind of censorship is unaffected by the campaigning measures used against traditional censorship: to use those today is to fight an enemy that is past and gone. And the weapons of the (still virulent) puritan forces, with their censorship and morality, are outdated too. The basic process is going on elsewhere, not at the conscious and manifest level of the seductive artifices - for good or ill - 146 Mass media, sex and leisure of sex. There is a terrible naIvety about this, among both the decriers of sexual liberty and its defenders, on the right and on the left. Let us take an example from an advertisement for Henriot champagne G.-F. Held). A bottle and a rose. The rose flushes with colour, begins to open, approaches the screen, swells, becomes tumescent. The amplified sound of a beating heart fills the cinema, accelerates, grows fevered, wild. The cork begins to rise from the bottle slowly, inexorably. It grows in size, moves towards the camera, its brass binding wires breaking one after another. The heart beats and beats, the rose swells, the cork again - ah, and suddenly the heart stops, the cork flies off and the foaming champagne bubbles out over the neck of the bottle, the rose grows pale and closes, the tension subsides. Let us recall also that advertisement for bathroom installations in which, with a great many contortions - and in ever greater close-up - a vamp simulates a mounting orgasm with taps and pipes and a whole battery of phallic, spermatic devices. And the thousands of similar examples in which there is all-out 'hidden persuasion' - so-called - that persuasion which 'so dangerously' manipulates our 'drives and fantasies' and no doubt has more impact in intellectual circles than on the imagination of consumers. Erotic advertising, so obsessive and guilt-inducing, stirs up such profound emotions in us. A naked blonde with black braces appears and, hey presto, the braces manufacturer is rich. And even though he points out that 'you only have to raise the most harmless umbrella towards the sky to turn it into a phallic symbol', Held does not question either the fact of its being a symbol, or the effectiveness of that symbol as such on effective demand. Further on, he compares two advertising projects for Weber lingerie: the manufacturers chose the first of these and they were right, he says, because, in the other, the swooning young man looks almost as though he has been slain. For women, the temptation to be dominant is great . . . but it is also a frightening temptation . . . If the sphinx-woman and her victim had become Weber 's brand image, the ambiguous guilt of their possible clients would have been so great that they would have chosen less compromising brassieres. And so the analysts, all deliciously a-quiver, will turn their learned attentions to the fantasies in advertising, to the devouring orality in them, the anality or the phallic symbols - all these things directly plumbed into the consumer 's unconscious, which was simply ready and waiting to be manipulated (that unconscious is, of course, assumed to be already there and given in advance, since Freud said so - a hidden essence, whose preferred fare is the symbol or the fantasy). There is the same vicious circularity between the unconscious and fantasies as there once was between subject and object at the level of consciousness. An unconscious stereotyped as an individual function and fantasies delivered as finished products by advertising agencies are indexed one to the other, defined one by the other. This is to elude all the real problems posed by the logic of the unconscious and the symbolic function by spectacularly materializing them in a mechanical process of The body 147 signification and the efficacity of signs: 'There is the unconscious and then there are the fantasies which lock into it, and this miraculous combination sells products.' There is the same naIvety here as among the ethnologists who believed the myths related to them by native peoples and took them literally, along with the superstitious belief of those peoples in the magical efficacy of their myths and rites - all of which was done to maintain the ethnologists' own rationalist myth of the 'primitive mentality'. There are beginning to be doubts about the direct impact of advertising on sales. It is perhaps also time to cast equally radical doubt on this naIve fantasmic mechanics - which serves as an alibi for both advertisers and analysts. Crudely put, the question is this: is there really any libido in all this? What is there that is sexual, libidinal in the eroticism deployed? Is advertising (and are the other mass-media systems) a genuine 'scene' of fantasy? Is this manifest symbolic, fantasy content ultimately to be taken any more literally than the manifest content of dreams? And is the erotic injunction ultimately any more valid or symbolically effective than the direct commercial injunction is in the marketplace? What is really going on here? In reality, one is faced with a mythology at one remove, which strives to pass off as fantasy what is merely fantasmagoria, to entrap individuals, by way of a rigged symbolics, with the myth of their individual uncon scious, to make them invest it as a consumer function. People have to believe that they 'have' an unconscious, that that unconscious is there, projected into and objectivized in the 'erotic' symbolism of advertising, which serves as a proof that it exists, that they are right to believe in it and therefore to wish to come to terms with it, first at the level of the 'reading' of symbols, then by the acquisition of the goods designated by those symbols and supporting those 'fantasies' . There are, in fact, neither symbols nor fantasies in this whole erotic shebang, and it is tilting at windmills to describe all this as a 'strategy of desire'. Even when there is not irony in the phallic or other messages, when they are not conveyed in an openly playful way, 'with a nod and a wink', we may safely take it that all the erotic material surrounding us is entirely culturalized. It is neither fantasmic nor symbolic materiat but simply atmospheric. It is neither Desire nor the Unconscious speaking, but the psychoanalytic culture, or rather subculture, which has become banal and commonplace, has passed into ordinary commercial parlance. It is second-level affabulation; strictly speaking, it is allegory. Id (the Uncon scious) does not speak there; what does speak merely refers on to psychoanalysis as it is established, integrated and 'recuperated' today in the cultural system. And it certainly does not refer to psychoanalysis as analytic practice, but to the sign function of psychoanalysis, as some thing culturalized, aestheticized, mass-mediafied. At any event, one should not confuse a formal and allegorical combinatory of mytho logized themes with the discourse of the Unconscious, any more than the 148 Mass media, sex and leisure artificial log fire should be confused with the symbol of fire. There is no relation between that 'signified' fire and the poetic substance of fire analysed by Bachelard. That log fire is a cultural sign and nothing more; it has value merely as a cultural reference. Thus, the whole of advertising and modern erotics are made up of signs, not of meaning. One must not be taken in by the escalation of the erotic in advertising (any more than by the escalation of 'irony', the play, the distancing and the 'counter-advertising' which, significantly, go along with it): all these contents are merely juxtaposed signs, all of which culminate in the super-sign that is the brand name, which is the only real message. Nowhere is there language - and certainly not the language of the Unconscious. This is why the 50 female bottoms priggishly arrayed by Airborne in its recent advert (' Ah, yes. They're all there . . . this is where we do all our initial research, examining every angle . . . for we believe, with Mme de Sevigne . . . ', etc.) can be shown - and many others too. They don't offend against anything, nor do they awaken anything 'deep within us'. They are merely cultural connotations, a metalanguage of connotations: they speak the sexualist myth of a culture that is 'with-it'; they have nothing to do with real anality, which is precisely why they are inoffensive, and immediately consumable as images. The real fantasy is not representable. If it could be represented, it would be unbearable. The advertisement for Gillette razor-blades showing two velvety female lips framed by a razor blade can only be viewed because it does not really express the - unbearable - fantasy of the castrating vagina to which it 'alludes', and because it is content simply to combine together signs emptied of their syntax, isolated signs, itemized signs, which trigger no unconscious associations (and which indeed system atically evade these), only 'cultural' ones. This is the Madame Tussaud's of symbols, a petrified forest of fantasies/ signs which no longer have in them anything of the work of the drives. All in all, then, to denounce advertising for its manipulation of the emotions is to pay it too great a compliment. But this gigantic mystifica tion, in which both censors and defenders willingly collude, doubtless has a very precise function, which is to deflect attention from the real process, that is to say from the radical analysis of the processes of censorship which 'operate' very effectively underneath all this fantasma goria. The real conditioning we are subjected to by the machinery of erotic advertising is not some 'deep-level' persuasion or unconscious suggestion, but rather the censorship of the deep meaning, the symbolic function, the fantasmic expression in an articulated syntax - in short, the censorship of the living emanation of sexual signifiers. All this is blotted out, censored, abolished in a codified play of sexual signs, in the opaque obviousness of the sexual that is deployed on all sides, in which the subtle destructuring of syntax leaves place only for a closed, tautological manipulation. It is in this systematic terrorism, which operates at the level of signification itself, that all sexuality empties itself of its substance The body 149 and becomes material for consumption. It is here that the 'process' of consumption takes place, and this is of quite a different order of seriousness from naive exhibitionism, fairground phallicism and knock about Freudianism. The Sexed Doll The sexed doll is a new toy. But the toys directed at children on the basis of adult fantasies implicate the whole of a civilization. This new doll attests to the general nature of our relation to sex in consumer society which, like our relation to everything else, is governed by a process of simulation and restoration. The driving principle of this is an artificial mad desire [vertigel for realism: sexuality is confused, in this case, with the 'objective' reality of the sexual organs. If we look closely, it is the same with colour in television, with nudity in advertising or elsewhere, as it is in participation in the factories or the 'organic and active' participation of spectators in the 'total' spectacle of avant-garde theatre: everywhere we find an effort artificially to restore a 'truth' or a 'totality', systematically to restore a totality on the basis of the prior division of labour or functions. In the case of the sexed doll (the equivalent of sex as toy, as infantile manipulation), we must first have split off sexuality as totality, in its symbolic total exchange function, in order to be able to contain it in sexual signs (genitals, nudity, secondary sexual characteristics, the gener alized erotic signification of all objects) and to assign these to the individual as private property or as attributes. The 'traditional' doll fully performed its symbolic (and thus also sexual) function. To deck it out with a specific sexual sign is, in a sense, to strike out that symbolic function and to confine the object to a spectacular function. This is not a special case: this sex added to the doll as secondary attribute, as sexual affabulation and, in fact, as censorship of the symbolic function is the equivalent, at the level of the child, of the nudist and erotic affabulation, of that glorification of the signs of the body which surrounds us on all sides. Sexuality is a total, symbolic structure of exchange: 1 It is deposed from its symbolic function by substituting for it the realistic, manifest, spectacular significations of sex and 'sexual needs'. 2 It is deposed from its exchange function (this is fundamental) by indi vidualizing Eros, by assigning the sex to the individual and the individual to the sex. This is the culmination of the technical and social division of labour. Sex becomes a fragmented function and, in the same process, is allotted to the individual as 'private' property (as also occurs with the Unconscious). We can see that one thing is going on here and one alone: the denial of sexuality as symbolic exchange or, in other words, as total process 150 Mass media, sex and leisure beyond functional division (that is to say, the denial of sexuality as subversive). Once its total, symbolic exchange function has been deconstructed and lost, sexuality collapses into the dual use-value/ exchange-value schema (which two aspects are together characteristic of the notion of object). It is objectivized as a separate function, both: 1 use-value for the individual (by way of his/her own sex, 'sexual technique' and 'sexual needs', for in this case, it is a matter of technique and needs, not of desire); 2 exchange-value (though this is no longer symbolic, but either eco nomic and commodity-based - prostitution in all its forms - or, as is much more significant today, conspicuous sign-value - 'sexual status'). It is this whole story which is told by the sexed doll in its guise as 'progressive' toy. Like the naked female rump thrown in as a bonus in an advert for record players or Air India, this dollish sex is a logical aberration. It is as grotesque as a brassiere on a pre-pubescent girl (a thing you can see on beaches). And, though in appearance opposite to that, it has the same meaning. The one veils, the other 'unveils', but the two are equally affected, and equally puritanical. In each case, there is a censorship operating through the artifact, through the conspicuous simula tion which is always based on a metaphysics of realism - the real here being the reified and the opposite of the true. The more signs/ attributes of the real are added and the more the artifact is perfected, the more is truth censored by diverting the symbolic charge towards the cultural metaphysics of reified sex. Everything will now be artificially sexualized in this way (not just dolls), the better to exorcise the libidinal dimension and the symbolic function. But this particular case is an admirable one, for here it is the parents who, in good faith(?) and on the pretext of sexual education, carry out a veritable castration on the child by the over-exhibition of sexual signs where they have no place at all. 9 T he Drama of Leisure or the Impossibility of Wasting One's Time In the real or imagined abundance of the 'consumer society', Time occupies something of a privileged place. The demand for that very special kind of good equals the demand for almost all the others taken together. There is, of course, no more an equality of opportunity - or democracy - of free time than there is of other goods and services. Moreover, we know that, though it has some significance between periods or between cultures, the accounting of free time in chronometric units is not at all meaningful for us as an absolute value: the quality of that free time, its rhythm and its contents, and whether it is residual to the demands of work or 'autonomous', are all things which make a difference between particular individuals, categories or classes. And even the excess of work and the lack of leisure can become the privilege of the manager or of the high-ranking official. In spite of these dis parities, which would only assume their full meaning within a differ ential theory of signs of status (of which 'consumed' free time is a part), the fact remains that time retains a particular mythic value for its equalizing of human conditions, a value which has been taken up again strongly and thematized in our own day in the concept of leisure time. The old adage that 'all men are equal before time and death', which once encapsulated in its entirety the demand for social justice, today lives on in the carefully tended myth that all are equal in leisure. Going harpoon fishing together and sharing the Samos wine created a deep sense of fellow-feeling. On the boat back, they realized that they knew each other only by their Christian names and, wishing to exchange addresses, discovered to their amazement that they worked in the same factory, the one as technical director, the other as nightwatchman. This delightful little fable, which sums up the entire ideology of the Club Mediterranee, involves several metaphysical postulates: 1 Leisure is the realm of freedom. 2 Every man is, by nature, in substance free and equal to others: he has only to be put back in a state of 'nature' to recover this substantial liberty, equality and fraternity. Thus, the Greek islands and the underwater depths are heirs to the ideals of the French Revolution. 3 Time is an a priori, transcendent dimension, which pre-exists its contents. It is there waiting for you. If it is alienated and subjugated in work, then 'you don't have time.' When you are away from work 152 Mass media, sex and leisure or unconstrained, 'you have time.' As an absolute, inalienable dimen sion, like air or water, in leisure it once again becomes everyone's private property. This last point is the key one: it hints at the fact that time might well be only the product of a certain culture and, more precisely, of a certain mode of production. In that case, it is necessarily subject to the same status as all the goods produced or available within the framework of that system of production: that of property, private or public, that of appropriation, that of the object, possessed and alienable, alienated or free, and, like all objects produced by that systematic mode, partaking of the reified abstraction of exchange-value. Of most objects, one can still say that they have a certain use-value, which is in theory dissociable from their exchange-value. But is this true of time? Where is the use-value that could be defined by some objective function or specific practice? For this is the exigency which lies at the bottom of 'free' time: that we restore to time its use-value, that we liberate it as an empty dimension to fill it with its individual freedom. Now, in our system, time can only be 'liberated' as object, as chronometric capital of years, hours, days, weeks, to be 'invested' by each person 'as he pleases'. It is already, therefore, no longer in fact 'free', since it is governed in its chronometry by the total abstraction which is that of the system of production. The demand underlying leisure is, therefore, an insolubly contra dictory and truly desperate one. Its fervid hope for freedom attests to the power of the system of constraints which is nowhere so total, precisely, as at the level of time. 'When I speak of time, it is already gone,' said Apollinaire. Of leisure we may say that 'When you "have" time, it is no longer free.' And the contradiction here is not one of terms, but of substance. This is the tragic paradox of consumption. Everyone wants to put - believes he has put - his desire into every object possessed, consumed, and into every minute of free time, but from every object appropriated, from every satisfaction achieved, and from every 'avail able' minute, the desire is already absent, necessarily absent. All that remains is consomme of desire. In primitive societies there is no time. The question of whether one 'has' time or not has no meaning there. Time there is nothing but the rhythm of repeated collective activities (the ritual of work and of feasting). It cannot be dissociated from these activities and projected into the future, or planned and manipulated. It is not individual; it is the very rhythm of exchange which culminates in the act of feasting. There is no name for it; it merges with the verbs of exchanging, with the cycle of men and nature. It is, therefore, 'bound', but not constrained and this 'binding' (Gebundenheit) does not stand opposed to some kind of 'free dom'. It is properly symbolic, which is to say that it cannot be abstractly The drama of leisure 153 isolated. But to say 'time is symbolic' has no meaning: it simply does not exist there, any more than does money. The analogy between time and money is, on the other hand, funda mental to the analysis of 'our' times and what the great significant break between working time and free time might imply. This is a crucial break since the basic options of consumer society are based upon it. 'Time is money': this slogan etched in letters of fire on Remington typewriters is also written above the factory gates, and inscribed in the subjugated time of daily life, in the increasingly important notion of the 'time-budget'. It even governs - and it is this which concerns us here - leisure and free time. And it is this slogan too which defines empty time and is etched on the beach sundials and over the entrances to the holiday villages. Time is a rare and precious commodity, subject to the laws of exchange-value. This is clearly true of working time, since it is bought and sold. But, increasingly, free time itself has to be directly or indirectly purchased before it can be 'consumed'. Norman Mailer has analysed the production calculation carried out on orange juice, delivered frozen or liquid (in a carton). The latter is dearer because the price includes the two minutes gained over preparing the frozen product: in this way, the consumer's own free time is being sold to him. And there is logic in this, since 'free' time is in fact time 'earned'; it is capital on which a return can be had, potential productive power, which has therefore to be bought if one is to have control of it. One could only be amazed or indignant at this if one still held to the naive hypothesis of a 'natural' time, ideally neutral and available to all. The idea, which is not at all absurd, that one might be able to put a shilling in a juke-box and 'buy back' two minutes' silence illustrates the same truth. Divisible, abstract, measured time thus becomes homogeneous with the exchange-value system: it forms part of that system on the same basis as any other object. As an object of temporal calculation, it can and must be exchanged against any other commodity (in particular, money). Moreover, the notion of time-as-object [la notion de temps/objet] is a reversible one: just as time is an object, so all produced objects can be considered as crystallized time - not just labour time in the calculation of their market value, but also leisure time, in so far as technical objects 'save' time for those who use them and are sold on that basis. The washing machine is free time for the housewife, potential free time transformed into an object so as to be buyable and sellable (free time she may possibly take advantage of to watch TV and the adverts she can see there for washing machines!). This law of time as exchange-value and as productive force does not stop at leisure's doorstep, as though leisure miraculously escaped all the constraints that rule working time. The laws of the (production) system do not take holidays. On the roads, on the beaches, in the holiday villages - they everywhere continually reproduce time as productive force. 154 Mass media, sex and leisure The apparent division into working time and leisure time - the latter ushering in the transcendent sphere of liberty - is a myth. This grand opposition, which is increasingly fundamental at the lived level of consumer society, remains nonetheless a formal one. This gigantic orchestration of annual time into a 'solar year' and a 'social year ', with the holidays as the solstice of private life and the beginning of spring as the solstice (or equinox) of collective life - this gigantic ebbing and flowing is a seasonal rhythm in appearance only. It is not a rhythm at all (a succession of natural moments of a cycle), but a functional mechanism. It is a single systematic process which splits two ways into working time and leisure time. We shall see that, as a function of this common objective logic, the norms and constraints which are those of working time are transferred to free time and its contents. Let us return, for a moment, to the specific ideology of leisure. Rest, relaxation, escape and distraction are, perhaps, 'needs': but they do not in themselves define the specific exigency of leisure, which is the consumption of time. Free time is, perhaps, the entire ludic activity one fills it up with, but it is, first of all, the freedom to waste one's time, and possibly even to 'kill' it, to expend it as pure loss (this is why it is insufficient to say that leisure is 'alienated' because it is merely the time necessary to reproduce labour power. The alienation of leisure is more profound: it does not relate to the direct subordination to working time, but is linked to the very impossibility of wasting one's time). The true use-value of time, the use-value which leisure desperately tries to restore, is that of being wasted. 1 The holidays are this quest for a time which one can waste in the full sense of the term, without that waste entering in its turn into a process of calculation, without that time being (at the same time) in some way 'earned'. In our system of production and productive forces, one can only earn one's time: this fatality weighs upon leisure as it does upon work. One can only 'exploit [faire-valoir] one's time', if only by making a spectacularly empty use of it. The free time of the holidays remains the private property of the holiday-maker: an object, a possession he has earned with the sweat of his brow over the year; it is something owned by him, possessed by him as he possesses his other objects - something he could not relinquish to give it or sacrifice it (as one does with objects in making gifts of them), to yield it back up to total availability, to that absence of time which would be true freedom. He is tethered to 'his' time as Prometheus was tethered to his rock, tethered to the Promethean myth of time as productive force. Sisyphus, Tantalus, Prometheus: all the existential myths of 'absurd freedom' are reasonably accurate representations of the holiday-maker in his setting, with all his desperate efforts to imitate 'vacation', gratuitous ness, a total dispossession, a void, a loss of himself and of his time which he cannot achieve, being, as he is, an object caught up in a definitively objectivized dimension of time. The drama of leisure 155 We are in an age when men will never manage to waste enough time to be rid of the inevitability of spending their lives earning it. But you can't throw off time like underwear. You can no longer either kill it or waste it, any more than you can money, since they are both the very expression of the exchange-value system. In the symbolic dimension, gold and money are excrement. It is the same with objectivized time. But it is, in fact, very rare - and logically impossible in the current system - for money or time to be restored to their 'archaic', sacrificial function of excrement. That would really be to deliver oneself of them in the symbolic mode. In the order based on calculation and capital, things are, in a sense, precisely the opposite way about: objectivized by it, and manipulated by it as exchange-value, it is we who have become the excrement of money, it is we who have become the excrement of time. Thus, everywhere, in spite of the fiction of freedom in leisure, 'free' time is logically impossible: there can only be constrained time. The time of consumption is that of production. It is so to the extent that it is only ever an 'escapist' parenthesis in the cycle of production. But, once again, this functional complementarity (variously shared out in the different social classes) is not its essential determination. Leisure is constrained in so far as, behind its apparent gratuitousness, it faithfully reproduces all the mental and practical constraints which are those of productive time and subjugated [asservi] daily life. It is not characterized by creative activities: creating, artistically or otherwise, is never a leisure activity. Leisure is generally characterized by regressive activities of a type pre-dating modern forms of work (potter ing, handicrafts, collecting, fishing). The guiding model for free time is the only one experienced up to that point: the model of childhood. But there is confusion here between the childhood experience of freedom in play and the nostalgia for a stage of social development prior to the division of labour. In each of these cases, because the totality and spontaneity leisure seeks to restore come into being in a social time marked essentially by the modern division of labour, they take the objective form of escape and irresponsibility. Now, this irresponsibility in leisure is homologous with, and structurally complementary to, irresponsibility in work. 'Freedom' on the one hand, constraint on the other: the structure is, in fact, the same. It is the very fact of the functional division between the two great modalities of time which constitutes a system and makes leisure the very ideology of alienated labour. The dichotomy establishes the same lacks and the same contradictions on both sides. So, everywhere, we find in leisure and holidays the same eager moral and idealistic pursuit of accomplish ment as in the sphere of work, the same ethics of pressured perform ance. No more than consumption, to which it belongs entirely, is leisure a praxis of satisfaction. Or, at least, we may say that it is so only in appearance. In fact, the obsession with getting a tan, that bewildered whirl in which tourists 'do' Italy, Spain and all the art galleries, the 156 Mass media, sex and leisure gymnastics and nudity which are de rigueur under an obligatory sun and, most important of all, the smiles and unfailing joie de vivre all attest to the fact that the holiday-maker conforms in every detail to the principles of duty, sacrifice and asceticism. This is the 'fun-morality' Riesman speaks of, that properly ethical dimension of salvation in leisure and pleasure which no one can now escape, except by finding their salvation in other criteria of accomplishment. The increasingly marked tendency towards the physical concentration of tourists and holiday-makers - which stands in formal contradiction to the declared motive of pursuing freedom and autonomy - obeys the same principle of constraint which is homologous with that experienced in work. Solitude is a value spoken about, but not practised. People flee work, but not physical concentration. Here again, of course, social discrimination plays its part (see Communications, 8). Sea, sand, sun and the presence of a crowd are much more necessary to holiday-makers at the bottom of the social scale than to the better-off. This is partly a question of financial resources, but, above all, it is one of cultural aspirations: 'Subjected to passive holidays, they need the sea, the sun and the crowd to feel as though they really are somebody' (Hubert Mace, in Communications, 10, 'Vacances et tourisme', 1967). 'Leisure is a collective vocation.' This journalistic headline perfectly sums up the institutional character, the aspect of internalized social norm which free time and its consumption have assumed, in which the privilege of enjoying snow, idleness and cosmopolitan cuisine merely masks deep compliance with: 1 a collective morality of maximization of needs and satisfactions, which reflects point by point in the private and 'free' sphere the principle of maximization of production and productive forces in the 'social' sphere; 2 a code of distinction, a structure of differentiation - the distinctive criterion, which for the well-to-do of earlier ages was 'idleness', having now become the 'consumption' of useless time. It is the constraint that one must do nothing (useful) which governs leisure - and does so very tyrannically - just as it governed the status of the privileged in traditional societies. Leisure, which is still very unequally distributed, remains, in our demo cratic societies, a factor of cultural distinction and selection. We may, however, envisage this trend reversing itself (at least we may imagine this): in Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, the Alphas are the only ones who work, the mass of the others being condemned to hedonism and leisure. We may admit that, with the progress of leisure, and the generalized 'promotion' of free time, there will be a reversal of this privilege and the great thing will be to set aside less and less time for obligatory consumption. If, as is probable, though it is the opposite of what are ideally their goals, leisure activities, as they develop, increasingly The drama of leisure 157 sink into competitiveness and the disciplinary ethic, then we may suppose that work (a certain type of work) will become the place and time in which to recover from one's leisure. And work can even now be a mark of distinction and privilege once again, as is the case with the affected 'servitude' of top executives and managing directors who feel they have to work 15 hours a day. So we come to the paradoxical end-point where it is work itself that is consumed. To the extent that work is preferred to free time, that it meets a 'neurotic' demand, and that the excess of it is a mark of prestige, we are in the field of the consumption of work. But we know that anything can become a consumer object. The fact remains that today, and for long into the future, the distinctive value of leisure will remain. Even the reactional valorization of work merely proves a contrario the force of leisure as a noble value in our deepest conceptions. 'Conspicuous abstention from labour becomes the conventional index of reputability', writes Veblen in his Theory of the Leisure Class. Productive work is base: this tradition is still alive. It is perhaps even reinforced with the increased status competition we find in modern 'democratic' societies. This law of leisure-value is assuming the force of an absolute social prescription. Leisure is not, therefore, so much a function of enjoyment of free time, satisfaction and functional repose. Its definition is that of an un productive consumption of time. And so we come back to the 'wasting' of time we spoke of at the outset, though in this instance to show how consumed free time is in fact the time of a production. This time, which is economically unproductive, is the time of a production of value - distinctive value, status value, prestige value. Doing nothing (or doing nothing productive) is, in this regard, a specific activity. Producing value (signs, etc.) is an obligatory social prestation; it is the very opposite of passivity, even if the latter forms the manifest discourse of leisure. In fact, time is not 'free' in leisure; it is expended, and not as pure loss, because it is the moment, for the social individual, of a production of status. No one needs leisure, but all are charged to prove their freedom not to perform productive labour. The consumation of empty time is, therefore, a kind of potlatch, in which free time serves as a material of signification and sign-exchange (in parallel with all the activities subsidiary and internal to leisure). As in Bataille's The Accursed Share, it assumes value in its very destruction, in being sacrificed. And leisure is the site of this 'symbolic' operation.2 It is, therefore, within the logic of distinction and the production of value that leisure is justified in the last instance. We may verify this almost experimentally: left to his own devices, in a state of 'creative freedom', the leisured individual desperately seeks out a nail to bang in or an engine to strip down. Outside the competitive sphere, there are no autonomous needs, no spontaneous motivation. But still he does not give 158 Mass media, sex and leisure up doing nothing. Far from it. He imperiously 'needs' to do nothing, for this has a value of social distinction. Still today, what the average individual seeks in his holidays and free time is not the 'freedom to fulfil himself' (as what? what hidden essence is going to emerge?), but to demonstrate the uselessness of his time, the excess of time he possesses as sumptuary capital, as wealth. Leisure time, like consumption time in general, is becoming the highly charged part of social time, the part productive of value - a dimension not of economic survival, but of social salvation. We can see now what, ultimately, is the basis of the 'freedom' of free time. This is akin to the 'freedom' to work and the 'freedom' to consume. Just as labour has to be 'freed' as labour power to be able to assume economic exchange-value, and just as the consumer must be 'freed' as such, that is to say, left (formally) free to choose and establish preferences for the system of consumption to be established, so time has to be 'freed', that is to say, extricated from its (symbolic, ritual) implications to become: not only (1) a commodity (in labour time) in the cycle of economic exchange); but also, (2) a sign and sign material assuming, in leisure, a social exchange-value (ludic prestige value). It is this last modality alone which defines consumed time. Labour time, for its part, is not 'consumed' - or, rather, it is consumed only in the sense that an engine consumes petrol, a sense which bears no relation to the logic of consumption. As for 'symbolic' time, that time which is neither economically constrained nor 'free' as sign-function, but bound - in other words, indissociable from the concrete cycle of nature or reciprocal social exchange - that time is clearly not 'consumed'. In fact it is only by analogy with, and projection of, our chronometric conception that we call it 'time'; it is a rhythm of exchange. In an integrated and total system like ours, there cannot be any free availability of time. And leisure is not the availability of time, it is its display. Its fundamental determination is the constraint that it be different from working time. It is not, therefore, autonomous: it is defined by the absence of working time. That difference, since it constitutes the deep value of leisure, is everywhere connoted and marked with redundancy, over-exhibited. In all its signs, all its attitudes, all its practices, and in all the discourses in which it is spoken of, leisure thrives on this exhibition and over-exhibition of itself as such, this continual ostentation, this marking, this display. Everything may be taken away from it, everything stripped from it but this. It is this which defines it. 1 0 T he Mystique o f Solicitude The consumer society is not simply characterized by the abundance of goods and services but by the more important fact that in this society everything is a service. What is available to be consumed never presents itself as pure and simple product, but as a personal service, as gratification. From 'Guinness is good for you', via the receptionist's smile and the automatic cigarette machine's 'thank-you', to the politicians' deep concern for their fellow citizens, each of us is beset by a formidable obligingness, surrounded by a conspiracy of devotion and goodwill. The tiniest bar of soap is presented as the fruit of the thinking of a whole council of experts who have been poring for months over the softness of your skin. Airborne puts its entire management team at the service of your 'bottom' : For this i s the crux. That i s our prime area o f study . . . Our business i s seating you. Anatomically, socially and, almost, philosophically. All our chairs are the product of detailed observation of your person . . . If a chair has a polyester seat, that is all the better to hug the delicate curve of your posterior, etc. This chair is no longer a chair, it is a total social service for your benefit. Nothing is purely and simply consumed today - that is to say, bought, possessed and used for particular ends. Objects no longer serve a purpose; first and foremost they serve you. Without this direct object, the person alized 'you', without this total ideology of personal service, consumption would not be what it is. It is the warmth of gratification, of personal allegiance which gives it its whole meaning - not satisfaction pure and simple. It is in the sun of this solicitude that modern consumers bask. Social Transfers and Maternal Transference In all modern societies, this system of gratification and solicitude has its official support structure in the form of all the institutions of social redistribution (social security, pension funds, subsidies, insurances, grants and the various benefits) by which, as F. Perroux argues, the public authorities have been induced to correct the excesses of the powers of the monopolies by providing social allocations aimed at satisfying needs and not at remunerating productive services. These latter transfers, for which nothing is apparently rendered in return, in the long term reduce the aggres siveness of the so-called dangerous classes. 160 Mass media, sex and leisure We shall not discuss the real efficacy of this redistribution here, or the economic mechanisms by which it is effected. What concerns us is the collective psychological mechanism it brings into play. Thanks to their tax levies and their economic transfers, the social authorities (in other words, the established order) arrogate to themselves the psychological benefit of appearing generous, present themselves in a charitable light. A whole maternal, protectionist lexicon is deployed to refer to these institutions: social security, insurance, family allowance, old-age cover, unemployment benefit. This bureaucratic 'charity', these mechanisms of 'collective solidarity' - all of them 'hard-won social gains' - thus act, through the ideological operation of redistribution, as mechanisms of social control. It is as though a certain part of surplus value were sacrificed to preserve the restl - the overall system of power sustaining itself with this ideology of munificence in which the 'benefit' bestowed conceals the profit taken. This kills two birds with one stone: the wage earner is quite pleased to receive in the guise of gifts or 'free' services a part of what has previously been taken from him. This is, in short, what J.M. Clarke refers to as the 'pseudo-market society'. In spite of their commercial spirit, Western societies protect their cohesion by social security legislation, the correction of initial inequal ities and various priority allocations. The principle underlying all these measures is an extra-mercantile solidarity. The means is a judicious use of a certain dose of constraint for transfers which in themselves obey not the principles of equivalence, but the rules of a gradually rationalizing redistributive economy. More generally, it is, in Perroux's view, true of every commodity that it is the nexus not only of industrial processes, but of relational, institutional, transferential and cultural ones. In an organized society, people cannot purely and simply exchange commodities. What they hand over to each other are symbols, significations, services and information. Every commodity must be regarded as the nexus of non-chargeable services which qualify it socially. Now this point, which is correct, means, if we turn it around, that no exchange, no prestation in our society of whatever type is 'free', that the venality of exchange, even exchange of the most apparently disinterested kind, is universal. Everything is bought and sold, but market society cannot concede this either theoretically or legally. Hence the crucial ideological significance of the 'social' mode of redistribution: this induces in the collective mentality the myth of a social order entirely devoted to 'service' and the well-being of individuals.2 The Pathos of the Smile However, alongside the economic and political institutions, there is a whole other - more informal, non-institutional - system of social rela tions which interests us more precisely here. This is that entire network The mystique of solicitude 161 of 'personalized' communication which is invading everyday consump tion. For we are indeed talking of consumption here - the consumption of human relations, of solidarity, reciprocity, warmth and social partici pation standardized in the form of services - a continual consumption of solicitude, sincerity and warmth, but consumption in fact only of the signs of that solicitude, which is even more vital for the individual than biological nourishment in a system where social distance and the atrociousness of social relations are the objective rule. The loss of (spontaneous, reciprocal, symbolic) human relations is the fundamental fact of our societies. It is on this basis that we are seeing the systematic reinjection of human relations - in the form of signs - into the social circuit, and are seeing the consumption of those relations and of that human warmth in signified form. The receptionist, the social worker, the public relations consultant, the advertising pin-up girl, all these apostles of the social machine have as their secular mission the gratifica tion, the lubrication of social relations with the institutional smile. Every where we see advertising aping intimate, intimist, personal styles of communication. It attempts to speak to the housewife in the language of the housewife next door, to speak to the executive or the secretary as a boss or a colleague, to speak to each of us as our friend or our superego or as an inner voice in the confessional mode. It thus produces intimacy where there is none - either among people or between people and products - by a veritable process of simulation. And it is this, among other things (though perhaps this above all), which is consumed in advertising. The whole of group dynamics and similar practices arise out of the same (political) objective or the same (vital) necessity: the accredited psycho-sociologist is well paid to reinject solidarity, exchange and com munication into opaque intra-company relationships. So it is with the whole tertiary sector of services. With the shopkeeper, the bank clerk, the salesgirl or the representative, in information services, sales promotion, all these jobs in the packaging, marketing and merch andising of human relations, not forgetting the sociologist, the inter viewer, the impresario and the salesman, whose professional rule is one of 'contact', 'participation' and 'gaining the psychological involvement' of others - in all these sectors of employment and roles, the connotation of reciprocity and 'warmth' is written into the planning and exercise of the function. It is the key asset in job-finding, promotion and salary level. Having 'human qualities', 'interpersonal skills', 'warmth', etc. We are surrounded by waves of fake spontaneity, 'personalized' language, orchestrated emotions and personal relations. 'Keep smiling'. Seid nett miteinanderJ': The smile of Sofitel-Lyon is the smile we hope to see on your face when you step through our door. It is the smile of everyone who has already spent an enjoyable time at one of our hotels . . . It is the demonstration of our hotel philosophy - service with a smile. 162 Mass media, sex and leisure Or there is operation verres de l'amitie [literally: friendship glasses]: Verres de /'amitie, with a dedication from the great names of stage, screen, sport and journalism, will serve as 'free gifts' to be given away with the products of firms which choose to make a donation to the French Medical Research Foundation . . . Among the personalities who have signed and decorated the verres de /'amitie are the racing driver Jean-Pierre Beltoise, the cyclist Louison Bobet, Yves Saint-Martin, Bourvil, Maurice Chevalier, Bernard Buffet, Jean Marais and the explorer Paul-Emile Victor. Or TWA: We are handing out a million dollars in bonuses to those among our employ ees who have surpassed themselves serving you! This hand-out depends on you, our contented passengers. We ask you to vote for the TWA employees who have really delighted you with their service! A tentacular superstructure which goes far beyond the simple function ality of social exchange to form a 'philosophy', a value system for our technocratic society. 'Playtime' or the Parody of Services This huge system of solicitude is based on a total contradiction. Not only can it not mask the iron law of market society, the objective truth of social relations, which is competition - social distance increasing with urban and industrial concentration and crowding - and, most importantly, the spread of the abstraction of exchange-value into the very heart of daily life and the most personal relationships, but this system, in spite of appearances, is itself a system of production. It is the production of communication, of human relations in the service sector style. What it produces is sociability. Now, as a system of production, it cannot but obey the same laws as those of the mode of production of material goods. It cannot but reproduce in its very functioning the social relations it aims to transcend. Though designed to produce solicitude, it is condemned simultaneously to produce - and reproduce - distance, non communication, opacity and atrocity. This basic contradiction makes itself felt in all the fields of 'function alized' human relations. Precisely because this new sociality, this 'radiant' solicitude, this warm 'ambience' no longer has anything spon taneous about it, because it is produced institutionally and industrially, it would be astonishing if the social and economic truth of it did not show through in its very tone. And it is indeed this distortion we find everywhere: everywhere this bureaucratic system of solicitude is skewed by, shot through with, aggressiveness, sarcasm and involuntary (black) humour, and everywhere the services rendered, the obligingness are subtly combined with frustration and parody. And everywhere, linked to this contradiction, one feels the fragility of this general system of gratifi cation, and that it is always about to malfunction and collapse (which does indeed happen occasionally) . The mystique of solicitude 163 We are touching here on one of the deep contradictions of our so called 'affluent' society: that between the notion of 'service', which has feudal origins and traditions, and the dominant democratic values. The serf or feudal servant served 'in good faith', without any mental reserva tions: however, the system is already visibly in crisis in Swift's Directions to Servants (1745), in which the servants, united on the margins of their masters' society, form a society apart, a parasitic, cynical, parodic and sarcastic society. This is the collapse, where the manners of the day were concerned, of the fealty-based society of 'service': it leads to a fierce hypocrisy, to a kind of latent, shamefaced class struggle, to reciprocal shameless exploitation between masters and servants under cover of a system of values which, formally, has not changed. Today we have democratic values: as a result, there is an irresolvable contradiction at the level of 'services', the provision of which is irrecon cilable with the formal equality of persons. The only outcome is a generalized social game (for it is everyone's lot today - and not just in private life but also in their social and occupational practice - to receive or provide services. Everyone is, to a greater or lesser extent, everyone else's tertiary sector). This social game of human relations in a bureau cratic society differs from the fierce hypocrisy of Swift's domestics. It is a gigantic 'simulation model' of the absent reciprocity. We no longer have dissimulation here, but functional simulation. The vital minimum of social communication is only achieved by this pressurized relational 'performance', in which everyone is engaged. It is a magnificent trompe l'oeil, designed to smooth over the objective hostility and distance inherent in all present relationships. Our world of 'services' is still largely Swift's world. The spite of the functionary, the aggressiveness of the bureaucrat are archaic forms that are still Swiftian in inspiration. For example, the servility of the ladies' hairdresser, the deliberate, unreserved importunity of the commercial traveller are still violent, forced, caricatural forms of the service relation ship. Theirs is a rhetoric of servility in which an alienated form of personal relationship nonetheless shows through, as it did between Swift's masters and servants. The way the bank clerk, the bellboy or the postmistress express, by their acrimony or their hyper-devotion, that they are paid to do what they do is the very thing that makes them human, personal and irreducible to the system. Their coarseness, insol ence, affected reserve, calculated slowness, open aggressiveness or, con versely, their excessive respect is plainly and simply that which, within them, is battling against the contradiction of having to embody, as though it were natural, a systematic devotion for which they are also paid. Hence the unwholesome ambience, constantly verging on veiled aggression, of this exchange of 'services' in which the real persons resist the functional 'personalization' of the exchanges. But this is merely an archaic residue: the true functional relationship today has resolved all tension. The 'functional' service relationship is no 164 Mass media, sex and leisure longer violent, hypocritical or sado-masochistic; it is openly warm, spontaneously personalized and definitively pacified. We find it in the extraordinary, vibrant atonality of the announcers at major airports or on TV; in the atonal smile, so 'sincere' and calculated (though, ultimately, it is neither of these things for it is no longer a question of sincerity or cynicism here, but of 'functionalized' human relations, cleansed of all temperamental or psychological aspects, cleansed of all real, affective harmonics, and reconstituted on the basis of the calculated vibrations of the ideal relationship - in a word, freed from any violent moral dialectic of being and appearance, and restored to the simple functionality of the system of relations). We are still, in our service consuming society, at the crossroads of these two orders. This was very well illustrated by Jacques Tati's film Playtime, which moved from traditional, cynical sabotage, the wicked parodying of services (the whole episode in the fancy restaurant, with the cold fish passing from one table to another, the malfunctioning systems, all the perversion of 'reception structures', and the breakdown of a world that is simply too new) to the useless instrumental functionality of recep tion rooms, armchairs and pot-plants, glass fa<;ades and 'impeccable' communication, all in the icy solicitude of the countless gadgets and a perfect ambience. Advertising and the Ideology of the Gift The social function of advertising is to be understood in the same extra economic perspective as the ideology of the gift, of free offers and service. For advertising is not merely sales promotion or the use of suggestion for economic ends. It is perhaps not even these things first and foremost (its economic effectiveness is increasingly being questioned): the specific message of 'the language of advertising' is the denial of the economic rationality of commodity exchange under the auspices of a general exemption from payment.3 That exemption assumes minor economic dimensions in the form of reductions, discounts and free gifts, all the little 'gizmos' and 'freebies' offered when one makes a purchase. The profusion of free offers, games, competitions and bargains is the outer trappings of promotional activity, its external aspect, as it appears to the ordinary housewife. An identikit picture: In the morning, the housewife/consumer throws back the shutters of her house - that happy house she has won in the Floraline competition. She takes her tea from the splendid Persian-style breakfast cups she got with Triscottes (only 9 francs 90 plus five tokens). She puts on a little dress - a bargain from 3J (20 per cent off) and sets off to the Prisunic, not forgetting her Prisu Card which allows her to make cashless purchases . . . No problem finding a main course! At the supermarket she played the Buitoni magic lantern game and won 40 centimes off a tin of poulet imperial (5 francs 90). And, for her son, The mystique of solicitude 165 something cultural: the Peter Van Haught painting free with Persil soap powder. Thanks to Kellogg's Corn Flakes, he has built himself an airport. In the afternoon, to relax, she puts on a record, a Brandenburg Concerto. The LP cost her 8 francs with the San Pellegrino three-pack. In the evening, a great new experience: a colour TV loaned free of charge by Philips for three days (simply on approval, no obligation to buy), etc. 'I sell less and less washing powder and more and more gifts,' sighs the marketing director of a detergent manufacturer. These are just the little touches, the window dressing of public relations. The point is, however, that the whole of advertising is merely a gigantic extrapolation of this 'something extra'. In advertising, the little daily gratuities assume the dimensions of a total social fact. Advertising is something 'bestowed'. It is a continual free offer to and for everyone. It is the prestigious image of affluence, but above all it is the repeated gage of the virtual miracle of 'something for nothing'. Its social function is, therefore, that of a public relations sector. We know how public relations proceeds: the works visit (Saint-Gobain), executive refresher courses in Louis XIII chateaux, the photogenic smile of the MD, artworks in the factories, group dynamics: 'the task of a PR man is to maintain a harmony of mutual interests between public and managers.' In the same way, it is the function of advertising in all its forms to set in place a social fabric ideologically unified under the auspices of a collective super patronage, a kindly super-feudality, which provides all these 'extras' the way aristocrats laid on feasts for their people. Through advertising, which is already a social service in itself, all products are presented as services, all real economic processes are staged and reinterpreted socially as effects of giving, of personal allegiance and affective relations. No matter that this munificence, like that of potentates, is only ever a functional redistribution of a part of the profits. The trick of advertising is precisely to substitute everywhere the magic of the cargo cult (the total, miraculous abundance the natives dream of) for the logic of the market. All the artful moves of advertising tend in this direction. See how discreet it is everywhere, how benevolent, self-effacing and disinterested. An hour 's radio programme against a one-minute 'ad' for its product. Four pages of poetic prose and the company trademark placed shame facedly(?!) at the foot of a page. And all its games with itself, piling on the self-effacement and the 'anti-advertising' parodies. The blank page for the millionth Volkswagen: 'We can't show it to you. We've just sold it.' All these things, which could be included in a history of the rhetoric of advertising, are logically deducible from advertising's need to dis tance itself completely from the level of economic constraints and to fuel the fiction of a game, a party, a charitable institution, a disinterested social service. The conspicuous display of disinterestedness plays its part as a social function of wealth (Veblen) and an integrating factor. And even a play of aggressiveness towards the consumer - antiphrasis - is 166 Mass media, sex and leisure admissible. All is possible and everything works, though not so much to sell as to restore consensus, complicity, collusion - in short, here again, to produce relationship, cohesion, communication. The fact that the con sensus produced by advertising can then result in attachment to objects, acts of purchase and implicit conformity to the economic imperatives of consumption is certain, but it is not the essential point. And, at any event, that economic function of advertising is consequent upon its overall social function. This is indeed why it is never safely assured.4 The Shop-Window The shop-window - all shop-windows - which are, with advertising, the foci of our urban consumer practices, are also the site par excellence of that 'consensus operation', that communication and exchange of values through which an entire society is homogenized by incessant daily acculturation to the silent and spectacular logic of fashion. That specific space which is the shop-window - neither inside nor outside, neither private nor wholly public, and which is already the street while main taining, behind the transparency of its glass, the distance, the opaque status of the commodity - is also the site of a specific social relation. Tracking along the shop-windows, with their calculated riot of colour, which is always at the same time a frustration, this hesitation-waltz of shopping is the Kanak dance in which goods are exalted before being exchanged. Objects and products are offered there in a glorious mise-en scene, a sacralizing ostentation (this is not a pure and simple displaying, any more than is the case in advertising, but, as G. Lagneau says, a 'setting-off', a 'showcasing'). This symbolic giving, aped by the objects themselves on their stage-set, this symbolic, silent exchange between the proffered object and the gaze, is clearly an invitation to real, economic exchange inside the shop. But not necessarily, and at any event the communication which is established at the level of the shop-window is not so much between individuals and objects as a generalized com munication between all individuals, not via the contemplation of the same objects but via the reading and recognition in the same objects of the same system of signs and the same hierarchical code of values. It is this acculturation, this training, which takes place at every moment everywhere in the streets, on the walls and in the underground stations, on advertising hoardings and neon signs. Shop-windows thus beat out the rhythm of the social process of value: they are a continual adaptabil ity test for everyone, a test of managed projection and integration. The big stores are a kind of pinnacle of this urban process, a positive laboratory and social testing ground, where, as Durkheim writes in The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, the collectivity reinforces its cohesion, as in feasts and spectacles. The mystique of solicitude 167 Therapeutic Society The ideology of a society which is continually taking care of you culminates in the ideology of a society which is actually treating you medically, as a potential patient. The social body surely must be thought rather ill then, and its citizen consumers rather fragile - always on the verge of collapse, of becoming unhinged - for this 'therapeutic' discourse to be so widespread among professionals, in the public prints and among analytical moralists. Bleustein-Blanchet: 'In my view, Gallup polls are an indispensable gauge of opinion, which the advertiser must use, like a doctor calling for tests and X-rays.' An ad man: 'What the client is looking for is security. He needs to be reassured, taken care of. At times you are a father to him, at times a mother or a son.' 'Our profession is akin to the art of medicine.' 'We're like medics, we give advice. We don't force anything on anyone.' 'My job is a vocation, like a doctor's.' Architects, advertising executives, town planners, designers all see themselves as demiurges or, rather, as thaumaturges of social relations and the environment. 'People live in ugliness': this we have to cure. Psycho-sociologists, too, see themselves as therapists of human and social communication. This is even true of industrialists, who present them selves as missionaries of well-being and general prosperity. 'Society is sick': this is the refrain of all the well-meaning souls in power. The consumer society is a canker; 'we have to give it back some soul,' says M. Chaban-Delmas. It must be said that this great myth of the Sick Society, a myth which evacuates all analysis of the real contradictions, is one those contemporary medicine-men the intellectuals very largely connive in. They, however, tend to locate society's ills at a fundamental level. Hence their prophetic pessimism. Professionals, in general, tend rather to maintain the myth of the Sick Society, as a society that is sick not so much organically (in which case it would be incurable) but functionally, at the level of its interchanges and metabolism. Hence their dynamic optimism: it only has to be cured to re-establish the functionality of interchanges, to speed up the metabolism (that is to say, once again, to inject communication, relationship, contact, human balance, warmth, efficiency and the controlled smile). These are all tasks they undertake cheerfully and profitably. The Ambiguity and Terrorism of Solicitude What has to be stressed about this whole liturgy of solicitude is its profound ambiguity. An ambiguity which coincides very exactly with the double meaning of the verb 'to solicit': 168 Mass media, sex and leisure 1 The dimension of 'solicitude', in the 'caring', 'favouring', 'mothering' sense. The gift. 2 The opposite meaning it assumes in the sense of 'requesting' (solicit ing a reply), 'demanding', or even 'commandeering'. This is a sense which is even more clearly seen in the modern usage of the term ('soliciting information', etc.). What is involved here is a diverting, a seizing of something; turning it to one's own ends. This is precisely the opposite of what is meant by solicitude. Now, the function of all the apparatuses of solicitude, institutional or otherwise (public relations, advertising, etc.), which surround us - and are, indeed, proliferating - is both to care for and to satisfy, on the one hand, and surreptitiously to gain by enticement and abduction on the other. The average consumer is always subjected to this two-pronged undertaking. He is solicited in every sense of the word - the ideology of the gift which is conveyed by 'solicitude' serving always as an alibi for the real conditioning which is that of his 'solicitation' or entreaty.s This rhetoric of thaumaturgy and solicitude which stamps the con sumer society, the affluent society, with a particular emotional tone has precise social functions: 1 The emotional re-education of individuals isolated within bureau cratic society by the technical and social division of labour and by the parallel technical and social division - itself equally total and bureaucratic - of consumption practices. 2 A political strategy of formal integration which covers - and covers up for - the failings of the political institutions: just as universal suffrage, referendums and parliamentary institutions are designed to establish a social consensus through formal participation, so advertising, fashion, human and public relations can be interpreted as a kind of perpetual referendum - in which citizen consumers are entreated [solliciUs] at every moment to pronounce in favour of a certain code of values and implicitly to sanction it. This informal system of mobilization of assent is safer: it leaves practically no way of saying 'no' (admittedly, the political refer endum is also a democratic staging of the affirmative response). In every country today we see 'participationist' modes of integration taking over from the violent processes of social control (repressive, state, political constraints). This they do, first, in the parliamentary, electoral form, and, subsequently, through the informal processes of solicitation we are dis cussing. It would be interesting to analyse in this light the 'public relations' operation mounted by Publicis/Saint-Gobain in the great sociological event that was Boussois's hostile takeover bid for Saint Gobain: public opinion was mobilized, and called upon as a witness and a 'psychological stakeholder ' in the operation. In the objective restructur ing of the capitalist enterprise, the public found itself, under the guise of 'democratic' information, integrated as jury, and, through the symbolic The mystique of solicitude 1 69 group of the shareholders in Saint-Gobain, manipulated as an actor in the drama. One can see how advertising activity, understood in the broadest sense, can shape and totalize social processes, how it can substitute itself daily - and no doubt even more effectively - for the electoral system in psychological mobilization and control. A whole new political strategy is coming into being at this level, contemporaneous with the objective development of the 'technostructure' and monopoly productivism. 3 'Political' control by solicitation and solicitude is accompanied by a more intimate control over motivations themselves. This is where the term 'solicit' assumes its double meaning, and it is in this sense that all solicitude is basically terroristic. Let us examine the admirable example of advertising which runs: 'When a girl tells you she adores Freud, what she means is that she loves comic strips: 'a girl is a "little wild thing", full of contradictions. Now, beyond these contradictions, it is up to us, advertisers, to understand that girl. More generally, to understand the people whom we wish to address.' People, then, are incapable of understanding themselves, of knowing what they are and what they want, but we are there to do that. We know better than you do about yourselves. A repressive position of paternalistic analysis. And the ultimate ends of this 'higher understanding' are clear: 'Understanding people in order to be understood by them. Knowing how to speak to them in order to be heard by them. Knowing how to please them in order to interest them. In short, knowing how to sell them a product - your product. This is what we call "communication" . ' A marketing trick? Not just that. This girl has no right to like Freud. She is wrong and, for her own good, we are going to foist upon her what it is that she secretly likes. The whole of the social inquisition is here, the whole of psycho logical repression. Advertising in general does not admit these things so clearly. Yet, at every moment, it operates the same mechanisms of charitable and repressive control. It is the same with the advert for TWA: 'the airline which understands you'. And just look how it understands you: We cannot bear to think of you all alone in your hotel room, frantically twiddling the controls of your TV . . . We'll do everything we can to enable you to take your better half with you on your next business trip, with our special family tariff etc. With your better half alongside you, at least you'll have someone to change channels . . . That's what love is. There is no question of being alone then. You don't have the right to be alone: 'We cannot bear the idea.' If you don't know what it is to be happy, we'll teach you. We know better than you. And even how to make love: your better half is your erotic 'second channel'. You didn't realize that? We'll teach you that too. We are there to understand you. That is our role. 170 Mass media, sex and leisure Sociometric Compatibility Sociability or the ability to 'relate to people', to sustain relationships, to stimulate exchanges, to intensify the social metabolism, becomes in this society a mark of 'personality'. Consuming, spending and following fashion and, through these things, communicating with others is behav iour which forms a keystone of the contemporary sociometric 'person ality' outlined by David Riesman in The Lonely Crowd. The whole system of gratification and solicitude is, in fact, merely the affective modulation (itself functionalized) of a system of relations in which the status of the individual is changing totally. To enter the cycle of consumption and fashion is not simply to surround oneself with objects and services as one pleases; it is to change one's being and directedness. It is to move from an individual principle based on autonomy, character, the inherent value of the self to a principle of perpetual recycling by indexation to a code in which the value of the individual becomes rational, diffracted, change able: it is the code of 'personalization', which no individual himself possesses, but which traverses each individual in his signified relation to the others. The person as a determining instance disappears and is replaced by personalization. From this point on, the individual is no longer a centre of autonomous values, but merely the expression of multiple relations in a process of shifting interrelationships. 'The other directed person is, in a sense, at home everywhere and nowhere, capable of a rapid if sometimes superficial intimacy with and response to everyone.'6 He is, in fact, caught in the toils of a kind of sociometric graph and is perpetually redefined by his position in these bizarre spiders' webs (these threads which connect A, B, C, D, E, in a web of positive, negative, unilateral and bilateral relations). He is, in short, a sociometric being, whose definition is that he is at the point of intersection with others. This is not simply an 'ideal' model. This immanence of others, and this immanence in others, governs all status behaviour (and hence the whole field of consumption) according to a process of unlimited interrelation ship, where there is not, strictly speaking, any individualized Subject with its 'freedom', or 'Others' in the Sartrean sense of the term, but a generalized 'ambience', in which the relative terms only assume meaning by their differential mobility. The same tendency can be read at the level of the objects/ elements and their combinatorial manipulation in modern interiors. In this new type of integration, then, it is a matter not of 'conformism' or 'non-conformism' (although these terms are still con stantly found in journalistic language, they relate to traditional bourgeois society), but of optimum sociality, of maximum compatibility with others and with the various situations and professions (retraining, versatility), of mobility at all levels. To be universally 'mobile', dependable and versatile: that is what 'culture' is in the era of human engineering. So, molecules form on the basis of the multiple valencies of particular atoms; The mystique oj solicitude 171 they can be unformed and reorganized differently or turned into large, complex molecules. This adaptive capacity coincides with a social mobil ity which is different from the rise of the 'traditional' parvenu or self made man. There is no severing of ties in the course of making one's individual career, no breaking out of one's class to make one's way, no meteoric rise. It is, rather, a question of being mobile with everyone else, and rising up the coded rungs of a strictly demarcated hierarchical ladder. There is, indeed, no question of not being mobile: mobility is a warrant of morality. We also have here, then, in every case, an enforced mobiliza tion. And the unceasing compatibility is also an accounting [comptabiliU]: in other words, the individual, who is defined as the sum of his relations, of his 'valencies', is also always accountable as such: he becomes a unit of calculation and enters voluntarily into a sociometric (or political) plan/ calculation. Proving Oneself and Approval (Werbung und Bewiihrung) In this network of anxious relations, in which there is no longer any absolute value, but only functional compatibility, it is no longer a question of 'asserting oneself', of 'proving oneself' (Bewiihrung), but of relating to and gaining the approval of others, soliciting their judgement and their positive affinity. This mystique of gaining approval is every where gradually supplanting the mystique of proving oneself. The traditional individual's objective of transcendent accomplishment is giving way to processes of reciprocal solicitation (in the sense in which we defined it above: Werbung). Everyone 'solicits' and manipulates, everyone is solicited and manipulated. This is the foundation of the new morality, in which individualistic or ideological values give way to a kind of generalized relativity, of receptiv ity and agreement, of anxious communication - others must 'speak to' you (and speak you: they must address you, but must also express you and say what you are), love you, rally round you. We have seen the orchestration of this in advertising, which does not so much seek to inform you (or even, in the end, to mystify you) as to 'speak to' you. 'It is not important,' writes Riesman, 'whether Johnny plays with a truck or in the sandbox, but it matters very much whether he involves himself with Bill - via any object at all.'? We are reaching a point where the group is less interested in what it produces than in the human relations within it. Its essential work may be, more or less, to produce relationship, and to consume this as it goes along. This process may even suffice to define a group quite apart from any external objective. The concept of 'ambience' sums all this up quite well: 'ambience' is the diffuse sum of relations, produced and consumed by the group - the presence of the group to itself. If it does not exist, it can be programmed and produced indus trially. This is, indeed, the most common case. 172 Mass media, sex and leisure In its broadest sense, which goes well beyond common usage, this concept of ambience is characteristic of the consumer society which may be defined as follows: 1 Values related to 'objectives' and transcendence (final, ideological values) give way to ambience-related (relational, immanent, objective less) values, which exhaust themselves in the moment of relating ('con sumed' values). 2 The consumer society is simultaneously a society of the production of goods and of the accelerated production of relations. Indeed, this latter is the defining aspect. This production of relations, which is still craft-based at the intersubjective level or the level of primary groups, is, however, tending gradually to become aligned to the mode of production of material goods or, in other words, to the generalized industrial mode. It then becomes, by this same logic, the province (if not, indeed, the monopoly) of specialized (private or national) enterprises, and indeed constitutes their social and commercial raison d'etre. The consequences of this development are as yet difficult to foretell. It is difficult to accept that (human, social, political) relationships are produced in the same way as objects, and that, once they come to be produced in that same way, they become, similarly, objects of consumption. Yet this is, in fact, the case. But we are merely at the beginning of a long process here.8 Cult of Sincerity - Functional Tolerance For it to be produced and consumed, relating must - like material goods, like labour power, and according to the same logic - be 'liberated', 'emancipated'. In other words, it must free itself from all the traditional social conventions and rituals. This marks the end of courtesy and etiquette, which are incompatible with generalized functional relations. But the disappearance of etiquette does not mean that we come to relate spontaneously to one another. Our relating simply falls under the sway of industrial production and fashion. But because it is the opposite of spontaneity, it will imperiously take over all the marks of that spon taneity. Riesman has noted this in his description of the 'cult of sincer ity'.9 This is a mystique parallel to those of 'warmth' and 'solicitude' we have discussed above, as of all the obligatory signs and rites of absent communication: '[This] yearning for sincerity is a grim reminder of how little they can trust themselves or others in daily life. '10 It is, in fact, the ghost of lost sincerity which haunts all this contact based friendliness, these perpetual 'live link-ups', this aping and forcing of dialogue at all costs. The authentic relationship is lost, long live sincerity! Behind this obsession with 'honest pricing', with sporting, sentimental and political fair play, with the 'simple ways of the "great and the good!! ', the straight-talking confessions of cinema or other idols, or telephoto-lens shots of the daily life of royal families - and in this The mystique of solicitude 173 frantic demand for sincerity (like that for seeing the materials in modern building) - there is perhaps also (from a more 'sociological' point of view) the acculturated classes' immense mistrust of - and immense reaction against - traditional culture and rites, of whatever kind, which have always served to mark social distance. A massive obsession, which runs through the whole of mass culture - a class expression of the dec/asses of culture: the fear of being had, of being duped and manip ulated by signs as they have been historically over centuries - or, alternatively, the fear or rejection of high, ceremonial culture, a fear repressed beneath the myth of a culture of the 'natural' and of instant communication. At all events, in this industrial culture of sincerity, it is still the signs of sincerity which are consumed. And that sincerity is no longer opposed to cynicism or hypocrisy as it was within the register of being and appear ance. In the field of functional relations, cynicism and sincerity alternate without contradicting each other, in the same manipulation of signs. Naturally, the moral schema (sincerity = good; artificiality = evil) still operates, but it no longer connotes real qualities. It now connotes only the difference between the signs of sincerity and the signs of artificiality. The problem of 'tolerance' (liberalism, laxism, the 'permissive society', etc.) takes the same form. The fact that those who were once mortal enemies are now on speaking terms, that the most fiercely opposed ideologies 'enter into dialogue', that a kind of peaceful coexistence has set in at all levels, that morality is less strict than it was, in no sense signifies some 'humanist' progress in human relations, a greater under standing of problems or any such airy nonsense. It indicates simply that, since ideologies, opinions, virtues and vices are ultimately merely material for exchange and communication, all contradictory elements are equivalent in the play of signs. Tolerance in this context is no longer either a psychological trait or a virtue: it is a modality of the system itself. It is like the total compatibility and elasticity of the elements of fashion: long skirts and mini-skirts 'tolerate' each other very well (indeed they signify nothing other than the relationship which holds between them). Tolerance connotes morally the generalized relativity of functions/ signs, objects/signs, beings/signs, relations /signs, ideas/signs. In fact, we are beyond the opposition between fanaticism and tolerance, as we are beyond that between sincerity and fakery. 'Moral' tolerance is no greater than it was before. We have simply changed systems; we have moved on to functional compatibility. 11 Anomie in the Affluent Society Violence The consumer society is at one and the same time a society of solicitude and a society of repression, a pacified society and a society of violence. We have seen that 'pacified' daily life thrives on. a daily diet of consumed violence, 'allusive' violence: news reports of accidents, murders, revolu tions, the atomic or bacteriological threat - the whole apocalyptic stock in-trade of the mass media. We have seen that the affinity between violence and the obsession with security and well-being is not accidental: 'spectacular ' violence and the pacification of daily life are homogeneous, because they are each equally abstract and each is a thing of myths and signs. We might also add that violence is nowadays inoculated into daily life in homoeopathic doses - a vaccine against fatality - to ward off the spectre of the real fragility of that pacified life. For it is no longer the spectre of scarcity which haunts the civilization of affluence, but the spectre of fragility. And that spectre, which is much more menacing because it concerns the very equilibrium of individual and collective structures, and which has to be warded off at all costs, is in fact kept at bay by this roundabout solution of consumed, packaged, homogenized violence. This violence is not dangerous violence: blood on the front page no more compromises the social and moral order than does sex (despite the emotional blackmail on the part of the censors who wish to persuade themselves of this, and to persuade us of it). It simply attests to the fact that the balance is a precarious one, that the social and moral order is made up of contradictions. The real problem of violence arises elsewhere. It is the problem of the real, uncontrollable violence secreted by plenty and security once a certain threshold has been reached. This is no longer integrated violence, consumed with the rest, but the uncontrollable violence which well being secretes in its very achievement. That violence is characterized (precisely like consumption as we have defined it, though not as super ficially understood) by the fact that it is aimless and objectless.1 It is because we base our lives on the traditional idea of the pursuit of well being as a rational activity that the eruptive, unaccountable violence of the Stockholm youth gangs, of the Montreal riots, of the Los Angeles murderers, seems an incredible, incomprehensible manifestation and one which stands in apparent contradiction to social progress and affluence. It is because we base our lives on the moral illusion of the conscious Anomie in the affluent society 175 finality of all things, of the basic rationality of individual and collective choices (the whole system of values rests on this: there is in the consumer an absolute instinct which inclines him by essence towards his prefer ential ends - the moral myth of consumption which is the direct heir to the idealist myth of man as naturally inclined towards the Beautiful and the Good), that this violence seems unspeakable to us, absurd, diabolical. Now, perhaps it quite simply means that something far exceeds the conscious objectives of satisfaction and well-being by which this society justifies itself (in its own eyes) or, rather, by which it reinstates itself within the norms of conscious rationality. In this sense, this unexplained violence must cause us to reassess all our thinking on affluence: affluence and violence go together; they have to be analysed together. The more general problem of which this 'objectless' violence is a part, a violence which is as yet sporadic in certain countries, but virtually endemic in all developed or overdeveloped countries, is that of the fundamental contradictions of affluence (and not just its sociological dis parities). It is the problem of the multiple forms of anomie (to use Durkheim's term) or of anomaly, depending on whether we look at them in terms of the rationality of institutions or the lived evidence of normality - forms which run from destructiveness (violence, delin quency), through collective escapist behaviour (drugs, hippies, non violence), to contagious depressiveness (fatigue, suicide, neuroses). Each of these characteristic aspects of the 'affluent' or 'permissive' society raises in its way the problem of a fundamental imbalance. It is not easy to adapt to affluence, say Galbraith and the 'strategists of desire': 'our economic attitudes are rooted in the poverty, inequality, and economic peril of the past' (or in centuries of puritan morality in which humanity lost the habit of happiness).2 This difficulty of living in affluence should itself show us, if such a demonstration were needed, that the alleged 'naturalness' of the desire for well-being is not so natural as all that. Otherwise, individuals would not have so much trouble getting used to it; they would embrace plenty with open arms. This should indicate to us that there is in consumption something quite different, and perhaps even something opposite: something for which people have to be educated, trained, even tamed. It should tell us that there is here, in fact, a new system of moral and psychological con straints which has nothing to do with the realm of freedom. The vocabulary of the neo-philosophers of desire is significant in this connec tion. According to them, it is a question simply of teaching people to be happy, of teaching them to devote themselves to happiness, of creating within them the reflexes of happiness. Affluence is not, then, a paradise. It is not a leap beyond morality into the ideal immorality of plenty. It is a new objective situation governed by a new morality. Objectively speak ing, it is not therefore an advance, but quite simply something different. There is, then, this ambiguity about affluence: it is always simultan eously experienced as euphoric myth (of resolution of tensions and 176 Mass media, sex and leisure conflicts, of happiness beyond history and morality) and endured as a process of more or less enforced adaptation to new types of behaviour, collective constraints and norms. The 'Revolution of Affluence' does not usher in the ideal society; it simply leads into a different type of society. Our moralists would like to reduce this social problem to one of 'mentalities'. So far as they are concerned, the key shift has already occurred: real affluence is here and we simply have to move from a mentality of scarcity to a mentality geared to affluence. And they deplore how difficult this is and are horrified to see forms of resistance to plenty emerging. However, one has only to accept for a moment that affluence itself is merely (or is also) a system of constraints of a new type to understand immediately that the new (more or less unconscious) social constraint must be accompanied by a new type of demand for freedom. In the event, this takes the form of a rejection of the 'consumer society' in violent and Erostratic3 form (the blind destruction of material and cultural goods) or non-violent, abdicationist form (refusal to engage in it through either production or consumption). If affluence were freedom, then this violence would indeed be unthinkable. If affluence (growth) is constraint, then that violence is easy to understand; it follows logically. If it is wild, objectless, formless, this is because the constraints it is contesting are themselves also unformulated, unconscious, illegible: they are the very constraints of 'freedom', of controlled accession to happi ness, of the totalitarian ethic of affluence. This sociological interpretation leaves space for (I even believe it connects at a deep level with) a psychoanalytic interpretation of these apparently aberrant phenomena of the 'rich' societies. The moralists we have referred to, who also regard themselves as psychologists, all speak of guilt. By this they always mean a residual guilt, a hangover from puritan times, which, in terms of their logic, must now be on the decline. 'We are not yet ready for happiness.' 'The prejudices which do us so much harm.' Now it is clear that this guilt (let us accept the term) is, on the contrary, increasing as our affluence progresses. A gigantic process of primitive accumulation of anxiety, guilt and rejection runs parallel to the process of expansion and satisfaction and it is this source of discontent which fuels the violent, impulsive subversion of - and murderous 'acting-out' against - the very order of happiness. It is not therefore the past and tradition or any other of the stigmata of original sin which cause human beings, rendered fragile by happiness, to become uneasy in a state of affluence and, on occasion, to rise up against it. Even though that old burden is still there, it is no longer the key factor. Guilt, 'malaise' and profound incompatibilities are at the heart of the current system itself, and are produced by it in the course of its logical development. Forced to adapt to the principle of need, to the principle of utility (the principle of economic reality) or, in other words, to the ever full and positive correlation between a product of some kind (object, good or Anomie in the affluent society 1 77 service) and a satisfaction through the one being indexed to the other; forced into this concerted, unilateral and ever positive finality, the whole of the negativity of desire, the other side of ambivalence, and hence all the things which do not fit into this positive vision, are rejected, censored by satisfaction itself (which is not enjoyment [jouissance]: enjoyment, for its part, is ambivalent), and, no longer finding any possible outlet, crystal lize into a gigantic fund of anxiety.4 This explains the basic problem of violence in the affluent society (and, indirectly, all the symptoms of anomaly, depression or abdication). That violence, which is radically different from the violence engendered by poverty, scarcity and exploitation, is the emergence, in action, of the negativity of desire which is omitted, occulted, censored by the total positivity of need. It is the opposite mode of the ambivalence which resurfaces at the very heart of the smug equivalence of man and his environment in satisfaction. It is - against the imperative of productivity / consummativity - the emergence of destructiveness (the death drive) for which there can be no bureaucratic reception structures, since these would then become a part of a process of planned satisfaction and, hence, a system of positive institutions.5 We shall see, however, that, just as there are models of consumption, so society suggests or sets up 'models of violence' through which it seeks to tap, control and mass mediafy these irruptive forces. Indeed, in order to prevent this fund of anxiety, accumulated as a result of the breakdown of the ambivalent logic of desire and hence of the loss of the symbolic function, from resulting in that uncontrollable, anomic violence, society acts at two levels: 1 On the one hand, it attempts to diminish this anxiety by the proliferation of caring agencies: innumerable collective services, roles and functions are created; soothing, guilt-dispelling balm and smiles are injected into the system - psychological lubricants, not unlike the cleansing agents in washing powder. Enzymes gobbling up anxiety. And tranquillizers, relaxants, hallucinogens and therapies of all kinds are also on sale. An endless task, in which the affluent society, the provider of satisfaction without end, exhausts its resources producing the antidote to the anxiety generated by that satisfaction. An increasingly large budget goes into consoling the beneficiaries of the miracle of affluence for their anxious satisfaction. We may liken this to the economic deficit (which is not in fact calculable) created by the disbenefits of growth (pollution, built-in obsolescence, crowding, scarcity of natural resources), but it undoubtedly exceeds that by a very long way. 2 Society may try - and does try systematically - to claw back that anxiety as a means of stimulating consumption, or to claw back the guilt and the violence in their tum as consumable goods or distinctive cultural signs. There is, then, an intellectual luxury of guilt characteristic of certain groups, a 'guilt exchange-value'. Or, alternatively, the cultural malaise6 is offered for consumption like everything else; it is resocialized 178 Mass media, sex and leisure as a cultural commodity and an object of collective delectation, which merely leads more deeply into anxiety, since this cultural metaconsump tion is tantamount to a new censorship and starts the process off again. At any event, violence and guilt are mediated here by cultural models and turn back into the consumed violence we discussed at the beginning of this chapter. These two control mechanisms have powerful effects, but they are not, however, capable of forestalling the critical process of the turning - the subversive conversion - of affluence into violence. And it is useless to hold forth and gripe on, as all the critics do, about this 'inevitability' of violence, the 'unstoppable spiral', the possible social and moral solutions or, on the other hand, about paternalistic permissiveness ('young peorle have to have an outlet for their energies'). Some will look back longingly to the days 'when violence had a meaning', the good old violence of war, patriotism, passion and, ultimately, rationality - violence sanctioned by an objective or a cause, ideological violence or the individual violence of the rebel, which was still of the order of individual aestheticism and could be regarded as one of the fine arts. People will go on trying to fit this new violence into old models and apply known treatments to it. But we have to see that this violence, which is no longer strictly historical, no longer sacred, ritualistic or ideological - nor yet again, for all that, pure act or expression of individual singularity - is structurally linked to affluence. This is why it is irreversible, always imminent and so fascinat ing to everyone, whatever their explicit attitudes to it: this is because it is rooted in the very process of growth and increased satisfaction in which everyone is now involved. From time to time, within our closed universe of consumed quietude and violence, this new violence very briefly takes over for everyone a part of the lost symbolic function, before resolving back into a consumer object. Serge Lentz (on The Chase): 'The last scenes of the film are so savage that, for the first time in my life, my hands were shaking as I left the cinema. In the New York theatres where the film is currently showing, these same scenes spark incredible reactions. When Marlon Brando throws himself on a man, wild, hysterical members of the audience jump up screaming "Kill him! kill him!'" July 1966: Richard Speck breaks into a nurses' home in Chicago'S south side. He binds and gags eight young women all aged about 20. Then he executes them one by one by stabbing or strangulation. August 1966: c.J. Whitman, an architecture student at the University of Austin, Texas, sets himself up with a dozen guns on a 300-foot block overlooking the university campus and starts shooting: 13 dead, 31 injured. Amsterdam, June 1966: For the first time since the war, there was fighting of extraordinary violence for several days in the very heart of Anomie in the affluent society 1 79 the city. The Telegraaf building was stormed. Lorries were burned, windows smashed, hoardings torn down. Thousands of demonstrators running rampant. Millions of florins' worth of damage. One dead, some 10 injured. The revolt of the 'Provos'. Montreal, October 1969: Grave disorder broke out on Tuesday following a strike of policemen and fire fighters. Two hundred taxi drivers ran sacked the premises of a transport company. Shots were fired and two people were killed. After that attack, 1,000 young people descended on the city centre, smashing shop-windows and looting. There were 10 bank raids, 19 armed attacks, three terrorist explosions and a host of burglaries. Given the scale of these events, the government put the army on standby and passed an emergency law conscripting police officers. The murder at the Polanski villa: five persons of varying degrees of celebrity killed at a villa in the Los Angeles hills, including the wife of Polanski, a director of sado-fantastic films. A murder of idols exemplary because, by a kind of fanatical irony, it lent material form, in the very details of the murder and its staging, to some of the characteristics of the films which had won fame and success for the victims. And interesting because it illustrated the paradox of that violence: both savage (irra tional, with no obvious objective) and ritualistic (indexed to spectacular models imposed by the mass media - in this case, Polanski's very own films). Like the Austin murder, this was not a crime of passion, not committed by the criminal underworld or done for gain; it lay outside the traditional criteria of the legal system or of individual responsibility. Mindless, unreflected murders and yet 'reflected' in advance (here, aston ishingly, to the point of precise imitation) by mass-media models, and being reflected along this same route in similar murders or forms of 'acting out' (d. also suicides by fire) . This alone defines them: their spectacular connotation as news items, such that they are conceived from the outset as film scenarios or as reportage, and their desperate attempt in pushing back the limits of violence to be 'irrecuperable', to transgress and smash that mass-media order, to which they are in fact party even in their asocial vehemence. Subculture of Non-Violence Indissociable from these new-style phenomena of violence, though for mally opposed to them, are the modern manifestations of non-violence. From LSD to flower-power, psychedelia to hippies, zen to pop music, all have in common the rejection of socialization through status and the principle of productivity, the rejection of this whole contemporary lit urgy of affluence, social success and gadgetry. Whether this rejection paints itself as violent or non-violent, it is always the rejection of the activism of the society of growth, of enforced well-being as the new repressive order. In this sense, violence and non-violence, like all anomic 180 Mass media, sex and leisure phenomena, have a litmus function. This society which gives itself out to be, and sees itself as, hyperactive and pacified is revealed by the beats and the rockers on the one hand, and the hippies on the other, to be characterized at a deep level by passivity and violence. The one group lays hold of the latent violence of this society and turns that violence against it, taking it to extremes. The other group extends the secret, orchestrated passivity of this society (behind its fa<;:ade of hyperactivity) into a practice of abdication and total asociality, thus causing that society to deny itself, in accordance with its own logic. Let us leave aside here all the Christic, Buddhist, lamaistic themes of Love, Awakening and Heaven on earth, the Hindu litanies and total tolerance. The question would seem rather to be the following: do the hippies and their community represent a real alternative to the processes of growth and consumption? Are they not merely the inverted and complementary image of those processes? Are they an 'anti-society', ultimately capable of overturning the whole social order, or are they merely a decadent outgrowth of that order - or even simply one of the many versions of the visionary sects which have always cast themselves out of the world in order imperatively to bring about the earthly paradise? Here again, we must not mistake the mere metamorphosis of an order for its subversion. We want to have time for living and loving. The flowers, the beards, the long hair and the drugs are secondary . . . Being 'hip' first and foremost means being a friend to humanity. Someone who tries to take a fresh, non-hierarchical look at the world: a non-violent person, who respects and loves life. Someone who has true values and a true sense of proportion, who puts freedom before authority and creation before production, who values cooperation and non competition . . . Just someone kind and open who avoids doing others harm. That's the main thing. Or again: As a general rule, doing what you think is right whenever and wherever it may be, without worrying about approval or disapproval, on the sole express condition that it causes no harm or offence to anyone. The hippies immediately made headlines in the West. With its fondness for primitive societies, the consumer society immediately seized on them as part of its folklore, like a strange, inoffensive flora. Are they not ultimately, from a sociological point of view, merely a luxury product of rich societies? Are not they, with their orientalist spirituality, their gaudy psychedelia, also marginals who merely exacerbate certain traits of their society? They are, or remain, conditioned by the basic mechanisms of that society. Their asociality is communal, tribal. We may speak, in their regard, of McLuhan's 'tribalism', that resurrection on a planetary scale, under the aegis of the mass media, of the oral, tactile, musical mode of communication which was that of archaic cultures before the visual, Anomie in the affluent society 181 typographical era of the Book. They advocate the abolition of competi tion, of the defensive system and functions of the ego. But this is merely to translate into more or less mystical terms what has already been described by Riesman as 'other-directedness', an objective evolution of personal character structure (organized around the ego and the super ego) towards a group 'ambience' in which everything comes from, and is directed towards, others. The hippies' mode of guileless emotional transparency is reminiscent of the imperative of sincerity, openness and 'warmth' of the 'peer group'. As for the regression and infantilism which constitute the seraphic, triumphant charm of the hippie communities, these needless to say merely reflect, in glorificatory mode, the irrespons ibility and infantilism to which modern society confines each of its individuals. In short, the 'Human', almost hounded out of existence by productivist society and the obsession with social standing, celebrates its sentimental resurrection in the hippie community, where, beneath the apparent total anomie, all the dominant structural features of the main stream society persist. Writing of American youth, Riesman, referring to the cultural models defined by Margaret Mead, speaks of a 'Kwakiutl' style and a 'Pueblo' style. The Kwakiutl are violent, agonistic, competitive and rich, and engage in unrestrained consumption in the potlatch. The Pueblos are gentle, kind and inoffensive; they live frugally and are content to do so. Our current society can thus be defined by the formal opposition between a dominant culture which is one of unrestrained, ritualistic, conformist consumption, a culture which is violent and competitive (the potlatch of the Kwakiutl) and a permissive, euphoric, 'drop-out' sub culture of the hippie/Pueblo type. But everything indicates that, just as violence is immediately reabsorbed into 'models of violence', the contra diction here resolves itself into functional coexistence. The extreme of acceptance and the extreme of rejection here meet up, as on a Moebius strip by means of a simple twist. And the two models ultimately develop in concentric zones around the same axis of the social order. John Stuart Mill put it brutally: 'In this age, the mere example of non-conformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service.'7 Fatigue Just as there is a world hunger problem, so there is now also a worldwide problem of fatigue. Paradoxically, the two are mutually exclusive: endemic, irrepressible fatigue - like the irrepressible violence we have discussed above - is the prerogative of rich societies and is a product of, among other things, the overcoming of hunger and endemic scarcity which remains the major problem for pre-industrial societies. Fatigue, as a collective syndrome of the post-industrial societies, thus represents one of the profound anomalies, one of the ' dysfunctions' of prosperity. As a new mal du siecle, it should be analysed in conjunction 1 82 Mass media, sex and leisure with the other phenomena of anomie, whose recrudescence marks our age, at a time when such problems ought in fact to be disappearing. Just as the new violence is 'objectless', so this fatigue is 'groundless'. It has nothing to do with muscular fatigue or lack of energy. It does not arise from physical exertion. There is, of course, much spontaneous talk of 'nervous strain', of 'depression' and psychosomatic illness. This kind of explanation is now part of mass culture: it is in all the newspapers (and all the conferences). Everyone can fall back on this, as though it were something that could now be taken for granted, and can hence derive gloomy pleasure from being a martyr to their nerves. Admittedly, this fatigue signifies one thing at least (in this respect it has the same revelatory function as violence and non-violence): this society which claims to be - which regards itself as being - in constant progress towards the abolition of effort, the resolution of tension, greater ease of living and automation, is in fact a society of stress, tension and drug use, in which the overall balance sheet of satisfaction is increasingly in deficit, in which individual and collective equilibrium is being progressively compromised even as the technical conditions for its realization are being increasingly fulfilled. The heroes of consumption are tired. Various interpretations for this may be advanced on the psycho-sociological level. Instead of equalizing opportunities and reducing social competition (economic and status competition), the consumption process makes competition more violent and more acute in all its forms. Only in the consumer age are we at last in a society of generalized, totalitarian competition, which operates at all levels - the economy, knowledge, desire, the body, signs and drives. These are all things which are now produced as exchange-value in an endless process of differentiation and super-differentiation. We may also take it, with Chombart de Lauwe, that, rather than matching up 'aspirations, needs and satisfactions' as it claims to do, this society creates ever greater disparities both among individuals and among social groups who are wrestling, on the one hand, with the imperative of competition and upward social mobility and, on the other, with the - now highly internalized - imperative to maximalize their pleasures. Under so many opposing constraints, the individual comes apart. The social discrepancy of inequalities is added to the internal discrepancy between needs and aspirations to make this society one that is increasingly at odds with itself, disunited, suffering from a 'malaise'. Fatigue (or 'asthenia') will then be interpreted as a response on the part of modern man - a response in the form of a passive refusal - to his conditions of existence. But it has to be seen that this 'passive refusal' is in fact a latent violence, and that it is, by this token, only one possible response, the others being responses of overt violence. Here again, we have to restore the principle of ambivalence. Fatigue, depression, neur osis are always convertible into overt violence, and vice versa. The fatigue of the citizen of post-industrial society is not far removed from Anomie in the affluent society 183 the 'go-slow' or 'slowdown' of factory workers, or the schoolchild's 'boredom' . These are all forms of passive resistance; they are 'ingrowing' in the way one speaks of an 'ingrowing toenail', turning back in towards the flesh, towards the inside. In fact, we must reverse all the terms of the spontaneous view: fatigue is not passivity set against the social hyperactivity outside. It is, rather, the only form of activity which can, in certain conditions, be set against the constraint of general passivity which applies in current social relations. The tired pupil is the one who passively goes along with what the teacher says. The tired worker or bureaucrat is the one who has had all responsibility taken from him in his work. Political 'indifference', that catatonia of the modern citizen, is the indifference of the individual deprived of any decision-making powers and left only with the sop of universal suffrage. And the physical and mental monotony of work on the production line or in the office plays its part, too: the muscular, vascular, physiological catalepsy of positions imposed (both standing and seated), of stereotyped gestures, of all the inertia of the chronic underemployment of the body in our society. But this is not the essential point, and this is why 'pathological' fatigue will not be cured by sport and muscular exercise as naiVe specialists contend (any more than it will by stimulants or tranquillizers). For fatigue is a concealed form of protest, which turns round against oneself and 'grows into' one's own body because, in certain conditions, that is the only thing on which the dispossessed individual can take out his frustration, just as the blacks rebelling in the cities of America begin by burning down their own neighbourhoods. True passivity is to be found in the joyful conformity to the system of the 'dynamic' young manager, bright-eyed and broad shouldered, ideally fitted to continual activity. Fatigue is an activity, a latent, endemic revolt, unconscious of itself. This explains its function: the 'slowdown', in all its forms, is (like neurosis) the only way to avoid total, genuine breakdown. And it is because it is a (latent) activity that it can suddenly go over into open revolt, as the month of May [1968] everywhere showed. The spontaneous, total contagion, the 'powderkeg' of the May movement can only be explained by this hypothesis: what was taken for lifelessness, disaffection and generalized passivity was in fact a potential of forces active in their very resignation, in their ebbing - and hence immediately available. There was no miracle. And the ebbing since May is not an inexplicable 'reversal' of the process either. It is the conversion of a form of open revolt into a modality of latent protest (the term 'protest' should indeed be applied only to this latter form: it refers to the many forms of refusal cut off momentarily from a practice of radical change). Having said this, the fact remains that, in order to grasp the meaning of fatigue, we have to resituate it, beyond psycho-sociological inter pretations, in the general structure of depressive states. Insomnia, head aches, migraines, pathological obesity or anorexia, atony or compulsive 184 Mass media, sex and leisure hyperactivity: though formally different or opposed, these symptoms can in reality be interchanged, can substitute one for another, somatic 'conversion' being always accompanied, and even defined by, the virtual 'convertibility' of all symptoms. Now - this is the crucial point - this logic of depressiveness (namely that, being no longer linked to organic lesions or real dysfunctions, symptoms 'wander around') echoes the very logic of consumption (namely that, being no longer linked to the objective function of objects, needs and satisfactions succeed one another, link up one to another, substitute one for another on the basis of a fundamental dissatisfaction). It is the same elusive, unlimited character, the same systematic convertibility which regulates the flow of needs and the 'fluidity' of depressive symptoms. We shall tum once again here to the principle of ambivalence, which we have already mentioned in connection with violence, to sum up the total, structural interrelatedness of the system of consumption and the system of abreaction/ somatization (of which fatigue is merely one aspect). All the processes of our societies tend towards a deconstruction, a dissociation of the ambivalence of desire. That ambivalence, totalized in jouissance and the symbolic func tion, is split apart, but, in going off in two different directions, it obeys a single logic: all the positivity of desire passes into the series of needs and satisfactions, where it resolves itself in terms of managed aims; all the negativity of desire, however, passes into uncontrollable somatization or into the acting-out of violence. This explains the profound unity of the whole process: no other hypothesis can account for the multiplicity of disparate phenomena (affluence, violence, euphoria, depression) which, taken together, characterize the 'consumer society' and which we sense are all necessarily inter-linked, though their logic remains inexplicable within the perspective of a classical anthropology. Though this is not the place to do it, we ought to go further into: 1 the analysis of consumption as a general process of 'conversion', or, in other words, of 'symbolic' transfer of a lack to a whole chain of signifiers/ objects successively invested as part-objects; 2 generalizing the theory of the part-object to the processes of somat ization - here again a symbolic transfer and an investment - on the basis of a theory of the body and its status as object within the system of modernity. We have seen that this theory of the body is essential to the theory of consumption, the body being an epitome of all these ambivalent processes: both invested narcissistically as an object of eroticized solicitude and invested 'somatically' as an object of concern and aggressivity. 'It's absolutely classic: comments a specialist in psychosomatic illness. 'You take refuge in your headaches. It could be anything else at all, such as colitis, insomnia, various kinds of pruritus or eczema, sexual difficul ties, obesity, respiratory, digestive or cardiovascular problems . . . or quite simply, and indeed most often, insurmountable fatigue.' Anomie in the affluent society 185 Significantly, depression comes to the surface at the point where one is released from the constraints of work and where the time for satisfaction begins (or should begin) - the managing director with migraines from Friday night to Monday morning; suicide or death following hard upon retirement, etc. It is very well known too that, beneath the now institu tional, ritual demand for free time, the 'age of leisure' has seen the development of a growing demand for work, for activity, a compulsive need to 'be doing' or 'acting' in which our pious moralists immediately saw a proof that work was man's 'natural vocation'. It seems more likely that this non-economic demand for work is an expression of all the aggressivity that has not been satisfied in leisure and satisfaction. But it can find no resolution by that route since, arising from the depths of the ambivalence of desire, it here reformulates itself as a demand or a 'need' for work and thus re-enters the cycle of needs, from which we know there is no way out for desire. Just as violence can be turned to domestic use, to heighten the enjoyment of security, so fatigue, like neurosis, can become a cultural trait of distinction. Then the whole ritual of fatigue and satisfaction comes into play, most often among the cultivated and the privileged (though this cultural 'alibi' is filtering down very quickly). At this stage, fatigue is no longer anomic at all, and nothing of what we have just said of it applies to this 'obligatory' fatigue: this is 'consumed' fatigue and forms part of the social ritual of exchange and status.  CONCLUSION On Contemporary Alienation or the End of the Pact with the Devil The Student of Prague The Student of Prague is an old silent film from the 1930s, an expressionist film of the German school.! It tells the story of a poor but ambitious student impatient for a more prosperous life. As he is taking part in a drinking bout in a cafe near Prague, a hunt is in progress all around in which that city's high society is finding what amusement it can. Someone rules over that society and is pulling the strings. He can be seen manoeuvring the animals at will and regulating the movements of the hunters. And this man of relatively advanced years, with his top hat, gloves, knobbed stick, slight paunch and little turn-of-the-century goatee beard, looks like one of the hunters. He is the Devil. He contrives to have one of the women from the hunt lose her way. She meets the student - love at first sight! But the woman, being rich, is beyond his grasp. Returning home, the student broods on his ambition and dissatisfaction, which have now assumed a sexual dimension. The Devil then appears in the student's seedy room, which contains only books and a life-size mirror. In exchange for his image in the mirror, he offers him a pile of gold. The deal is struck. The Devil peels the specular image from the mirror as though it were an etching or a sheet of carbon paper, rolls it up, puts it in his pocket, and leaves, in suitably obsequious and sardonic fashion. Here the film's real argument begins. Thanks to his money, the student enjoys success after success, avoiding, with cat-like tread, the mirrors with which the fashionable society in which he moves unfortunately surrounds itself. At the beginning, how ever, he retains his peace of mind; he is not greatly vexed at no longer seeing his own image. But then, one day, he sees his own flesh-and-blood image. This double, which now frequents the same circles and clearly takes an interest in him, follows him around and never lets him rest. It is, we surmise, his own image - the image he sold - which the Devil has revived and put back into circulation. As the good image it is, it remains attached to its model; but, as the bad image it has become, it now accompanies him not only when he chances to pass by mirrors, but in life itself, wherever he goes. He runs the risk of being compromised by it at any moment, if the two are seen together (a number of small incidents of 188 Conclusion this kind have already occurred). And if he flees society to avoid it, it takes his place and completes what he had begun, distorting his actions to the point of rendering them criminal. One day when he has provoked a duel, but has resolved to make his excuses on the duelling ground, he arrives at the appointed place at dawn. But he is too late: his double has passed that way before him and the opponent is already dead. The student hides. His image continues to hound him, as though to be avenged for having been sold. He sees the image everywhere. It appears to him behind tombs, or at the edge of the cemetery. He is no longer able to have any social life; his existence is impossible. In this despairing state, he rejects even a sincere offer of love and, to put an end to all his troubles, settles on the plan of killing his own image. One day, the image pursues him into his room. In the course of a violent scene between the two, it happens to pass in front of the mirror from which it came. At the memory of this initial scene, nostalgia for his image, mingled with fury at what he is enduring on its account, pushes the student to the brink. He fires at it. Naturally, the mirror is smashed and the double, become again the phantasm it once was, vanishes into thin air. But at the same moment, the student slumps to the ground; it is he who is dying. For, by killing his image, he is killing himself, since, without his noticing it, the image has become living and real in his stead. In his death throes, however, he grasps at one of the fragments of the mirror scattered about the floor and realizes that he can see himself again. He loses his body, but, by paying that price, his normal likeness is restored to him just before he dies. The mirror image here symbolically represents the meaning of our acts. These build up around us a world that is in our image. The transparency of our relation to the world is expressed rather well by the individual's unimpaired relation to his image in a mirror: the faithfulness of that reflection bears witness, to some degree, to a real reciprocity between the world and ourselves. Symbolically, then, if that image should be missing, it is the sign that the world is becoming opaque, that our acts are getting out of our control and, at that point, we have no perspective on ourselves. Without that guarantee, no identity is possible any longer: I become another to myself; I am alienated. This is the first element, then, which the film presents. But it is not content merely to tell a general tale. It immediately supplies the concrete meaning of the situation. The image is not lost or abolished by chance: it is sold. It falls into the commodity sphere, we might say, and this is indeed the sense of concrete, social alienation. At the same time, the fact that the Devil can pocket this image as an object is also the fantastic illustration of the real process of commodity fetishism: from the moment they are produced, our works and our acts fall out of our grasp and are objectivized; they fall, literally, into the Devil's hands. Thus, in Chamisso's Peter Schlemihl the shadow too is separated from the person maleficently and becomes a pure thing, an article of apparel one might Contemporary Alienation 1 89 leave at home if one were not careful and which could get stuck to the ground if there were too sharp a frost. Schlemihl, who has lost his shadow, fancies he might have one drawn for him by a painter - one which will follow him about. And Egyptian legends say that one should not walk too close to water, since crocodiles have a taste for passing shadows. The plots of the two tales are equivalent: whether we are speaking of image or shadow, it is in each case the transparency of our relation to ourselves and to the world that is shattered, and life then loses its meaning. But there is one thing in the fables of Schlemihl and The Student of Prague that is superior to many other pacts with the Devil: the fact that they put Gold, and Gold alone - that is to say, commodity logic and exchange-value - at the centre of alienation. The two fables do, however, proceed in quite different ways after that, with the logic of the Schlemihl story - in which Chamisso does not carry through the consequences of the shadow being transformed into an object - lacking rigour. Chamisso fills out his tale with fantastical, comic episodes, like the chase over the 'sunlit sandy plain' after a wandering, masterless shadow, which might be his, or when the Devil gives him back his shadow to try out again for a few hours. But Schlemihl does not suffer directly from his alienated shadow; he suffers only the social reprobation which attaches to the absence of a shadow. Once it has escaped, it does not turn against him to become the instrument which destroys his very being. Schlemihl is condemned to solitude, but he remains the same. Neither his consciousness nor his life is taken from him, only life in society. Hence the final compromise, in which he stoically rejects the second bargain proposed by the Devil, which would give him back his shadow in exchange for his soul. Thus, he loses his shadow, but he saves his soul. The Student of Prague follows a much tighter logic. As soon as he has sold his image or, in other words, has sold a part of himself, the student is hounded to his death by it in real life. This translates the unvarnished truth of the process of alienation: nothing of what is alienated runs off into some neutral circuit, into an 'external world' over against which we might be said to remain free - suffering, with each dispossession, only a loss in our having, but always retaining possession of ourselves in our 'private' sphere and ultimately remaining intact in our being. This is the reassuring fiction of the 'inner self' or 'heart of hearts' [for interieur], where the soul is free of the world. Alienation goes much deeper than that. There is a part of us which gets away from us in this process, but we do not get away from it. The object (the soul, the shadow, the product of our labour become object) takes its revenge. All we are dispossessed of remains attached to us, but negatively. In other words, it haunts us. That part of us sold and forgotten is still us, or rather it is a caricature of us, the ghost, the spectre which follows us; it is our continuation and takes its revenge. 190 Conclusion We encounter the troubling atmosphere of this inversion of subject and object, this sorcery of the otherness of the same, in the most everyday expressions: 'He followed him about like a shadow.' And also in our cult of the dead - a propitiating of a part of us which is alienated once and for all, and from which, as a consequence, we can expect only ill. Now, there is a part of ourselves by which, when living, we are collectively haunted: social labour power, which, once sold, returns, through the whole social cycle of the commodity, to dispossess us of the meaning of labour itself; labour power which has become - by a social, not a diabolical, operation, of course - the materialized obstacle to the fruits of our labours. It is all this which is symbolized in The Student of Prague by the sudden emer gence, live and hostile, of the image, and by the long suicide (for such we must call it) which that image imposes on the one who sold it. What is crucial here, and is dramatically demonstrated to us, is that the alienated human being is not merely a being diminished and impov erished but left intact in its essence: it is a being turned inside out, changed into something evil, into its own enemy, set against itself. This is, on another level, the process Freud describes in repression: the repressed returning through the agency of repression itself. It is the body of Christ on the cross changing into a woman to obsess the monk who has taken a vow of chastity. In alienation, it is the human being's objectivized life-forces which at any moment change into him to his cost, and thus drive him to his death. In the end, Schlemihl gives relative meaning to his life and dies a natural death, like a solitary American industrialist, in a charitable institution he himself founded in the days when he was wealthy. He saved his soul by rejecting the second bargain. This division of the action flows necessarily from the ambiguity of the initial idea and, as a result, the fable entirely loses its rigour. In The Student of Prague, there is no second bargain. The student dies inexorably from the logical consequences of the first. This means that, for Chamisso, it is possible to sell one's shadow - that is to say, to be alienated in all respects of one's behaviour - and still to save one's soul. Alienation leads only to a conflict in social appearances, and, that being the case, Schlemihl can very easily overcome it abstractly in solitude, whereas The Student of Prague develops the objective logic of alienation in all its rigour and shows that there is no way out but death. Every ideal solution for overcoming alienation is cut off. Alienation cannot be overcome: it is the very structure of the bargain with the Devil. It is the very structure of market society. The End of Transcendence The Student of Prague is a remarkable illustration of the processes of alienation, that is to say, of the generalized pattern of individual and Contemporary Alienation 191 social life governed by commodity logic. Moreover, since the early Middle Ages, the Pact with the Devil has been the central myth of a society engaged in the historical and technical process of the domination of Nature, that process being always simultaneously a process of the taming of sexuality. Among the forces of evil, indexed to the Devil, the Western 'Sorcerer 's Apprentice' has served constantly to thematize the immense guilt attaching to the puritanical, Promethean enterprise of Progress, of sublimation and labour, of rationality and efficiency. That is why this medieval theme of the re-emergence of the repressed - of being haunted by the repressed and selling one's soul (the 'pact' reflecting the irruption of market processes into early bourgeois society) - was revived by the romantics in the very earliest years of the 'industrial age'. Since then, the theme has continued to run (parallel to the myth of the 'miracle of technology') beneath the myth of the inevitability of technology. All our current science fiction is steeped in it, as is the whole of everyday mythology, from the peril of the atomic catastrophe (the technological suicide of civilization) to the theme, played out in a thousand variations, of the fatal gap between technical Progress and human social morality. We may, therefore, suggest that the age of consumption, being the historical culmination of the whole process of accelerated productivity under the sign of capital, is also the age of radical alienation. Commodity logic has become generalized and today governs not only labour pro cesses and material products, but the whole of culture, sexuality, and human relations, including even fantasies and individual drives. Every thing is taken over by that logic, not only in the sense that all functions and needs are objectivized and manipulated in terms of profit, but in the deeper sense in which everything is spectacularized or, in other words, evoked, provoked and orchestrated into images, signs, consumable models. But the question then is: in so far as it revolves around the alterity of the selfsame (that is to say, around an alienated, abducted, essence of man), can this schema (or this concept) of alienation still be operative in a context in which the individual is no longer ever confronted with his own split image? The myth of the Pact and the Sorcerer 's Apprentice is still a demiurgic myth, the myth of the Market, Gold and Production, the transcendent objective of which turns around against human beings themselves. By contrast, consumption is not Promethean; it is hedonistic and regressive. Its process is no longer one of labour and self-surpassing, but a process of absorption of signs and absorption by signs. It is, therefore, characterized, as Marcuse says, by the end of transcendence. In the generalized process of consumption, there is no longer any soul, no shadow, no double, and no image in the specular sense. There is no longer any contradiction within being, or any problematic of being and appearance. There is no longer anything but the transmission and reception of signs, and the individual being vanishes in this combinatory and calculus of signs. Consumer man never comes face to face with his 192 Conclusion own needs, any more than with the specific product of his labour; nor is he ever confronted with his own image: he is immanent in the signs he arranges. There is no transcendence any more, no finality, no objective: what characterizes this society is the absence of 'reflection', of a per spective on itself. There is, therefore, no maleficent agency either, like that of the Devil, with whom one could enter into a Faustian pact to gain wealth and glory, since one is given these things by a beneficent, maternal ambience - the affluent society itself. Or, alternatively, we must suppose that it is society as a whole, as a societe anonyme, as a thing of 'limited liability', which has struck a contract with the Devil, has bartered all transcendence and finality for affluence, and is now haunted by an absence of ends. In the specific mode of consumption, there is no transcendence any more, not even the fetishistic transcendence of the commodity. There is now only immanence in the order of signs. Just as there is no agonizing ontological struggle, but a logical relation between the signifier and the signified, so there is no longer an ontological struggle between the being and its double (its shadow, its soul, its ideal), whether divine or diabolic; there is logical calculation of signs and absorption into the system of signs. There is no longer any mirror or looking-glass in the modern order in which the human being would be confronted with his image for better or for worse; there is only the shop-window - the site of consumption, in which the individual no longer produces his own reflection, but is absorbed in the contemplation of multiple signs/ objects, is absorbed into the order of signifiers of social status, etc. He is not reflected in that order, but absorbed and abolished. The subject of consumption is the order of signs. Whether we define this latter structurally, as the instance of a code, or empirically as the generalized ambience of objects, the involvement of the subject is no longer, at any event, that of an 'alienated' essence in the philosophical, Marxist sense of the term. It is not that of an essence which is dispossessed, taken over by some alienating agency and become foreign to itself. For there is no longer, properly speaking, any 'selfsame', any 'subject itself', or, therefore, any 'alterity of the selfsame', and therefore no alienation in the strict sense. The situation is rather like that of the child kissing his image in the mirror before going to bed: he doesn't entirely mistake the image for himself, since he has already 'recognized' it. Nor is it an alien double in which he is reflected: he plays with it, somewhere between sameness and otherness. So it is with the consumer: he 'plays out' his personalization between one term and another, one sign and another. Between signs there is no contradiction, just as there is no exclusive opposition between the child and his image: there is collusion and ordered involvement. The consumer defines himself by his choice within a 'game' played between different models or, in other words, by his combinatorial involvement in that game. It is in this sense that consumption is ludic and that the ludic dimension of consumption has gradually supplanted the tragic dimension of identity. Contemporary Alienation 193 From Spectre to Spectrum We have today no myth equal to that of the Pact with the Devil or the Sorcerer's Apprentice (which thematized the fatal contradiction between the individual being and his Double) to thematize the peaceful coexist ence - in the guise of a paradigmatic declension - of the successive terms which define the 'personal' model. Tragic duality (which the situationists are again restoring in the concept of the 'spectacle', the 'society of the spectacle', and radical alienation) had its great myths, all of them linked to the notion of a human essence and the inevitability of losing it - linked to Being and its spectre. But the ludic ramification of the person into a spectrum of signs and objects, nuances and differences, which constitutes the basis of the consumption process and totally redefines the individual not as alienated substance but as shifting difference - this novel process, which is not analysable in terms of the person (what an admirable amphibology we have in the French word personne which, on its own, means 'no one'!) and the alterity of the person, has not found an equivalent myth to embody the Metaphysics of Consumption - a meta physical myth to represent what the Double and Alienation represented for the order of production. This is no accident. Myths, like the faculties of speech, reflection and transcription, are indissociable from transcend ence, and disappear with it. Consumption of Consumption If the consumer society no longer produces myth, this is because it is itself its own myth. The Devil, who brought Gold and Wealth (the price of which was our soul), has been supplanted by Affluence pure and simple. And the pact with the Devil has been supplanted by the contract of Affluence. Moreover, just as the most diabolical aspect of the Devil has never been his existing, but his making us believe that he exists, so Affluence does not exist, but it only has to make us believe it exists to be an effective myth. Consumption is a myth. That is to say, it is a statement of contemporary society about itself, the way our society speaks itself. And, in a sense, the only objective reality of consumption is the idea of consumption; it is this reflexive, discursive configuration, endlessly repeated in everyday speech and intellectual discourse, which has acquired the force of common sense. Our society thinks itself and speaks itself as a consumer society. As much as it consumes anything, it consumes itself as consumer society, as idea. Advertising is the triumphal paean to that idea. This is not a supplementary dimension; it is a fundamental one, for it is the dimension of myth. If we did nothing but consume (getting, devouring, digesting), consumption would not be a myth, which is to 194 Conclusion say that it would not be a full, self-fulfilling discourse of society about itself, a general system of interpretation, a mirror in which it takes supreme delight in itself, a utopia in which it is reflected in advance. In this sense, affluence and consumption - again, we mean not the con sumption of material goods, products and services, but the consumed image of consumption - do, indeed, constitute our new tribal mythology - the morality of modernity. Without that anticipation and reflexive potentialization of enjoyment in the 'collective consciousness', consumption would merely be what it is and would not be such a force for social integration. It would merely be a richer, more lavish, more differentiated mode of subsistence than before, but it would no more have a name than ever it did before, when nothing designated as collective value, as reference myth what was merely a mode of survival (eating, drinking, housing and clothing oneself) or the sumptuary expenditure (finery, great houses, jewels) of the privileged classes. Neither eating roots nor throwing feasts was given the name 'consuming'. Our age is the first in which current expenditure on food and 'prestige' expenditure have both been termed consumption by everyone concerned, there being a total consensus on the matter. The historic emergence of the myth of consumption in the twentieth century is radically different from the emergence of the technical concept in economic thinking or science, where it was employed much earlier. That terminological systematization for everyday use changes history itself: it is the sign of a new social reality. Strictly speaking, there has been consumption only since the term has 'passed into general usage'. Though it is mystifying and analytically useless - a veritable 'anti concept' indeed - it signifies, nonetheless, that an ideological restructur ing of values has occurred. The fact that this society experiences itself as a consumer society must be the starting point for an objective analysis. When we say that this 'affluent' society is its own myth, we mean that it takes over, at a general level, that admirable advertising slogan which might happily serve as its motto: the body you dream of is your own. A kind of immense collective narcissism is inducing society to merge itself into - and absolve itself in - the image it presents of itself, to be convinced of itself in the way that advertising ends up convincing people of their bodies and the prestige values of those bodies. In short, it is becoming its own 'self-fulfilling prophecy'.2 Boorstin has shown how this immense process of self-demonstrative tautology works in the USA, where a whole society speaks itself in the mode of prophecy, but a prophecy which does not have future ideals or transcendent heroes for its substance, but solely the reflection of itself and of its immanence. Advertising is dedicated entirely to this function: the consumer can at any moment read, as in Till Eulenspiegel's mirror, what he is and what he desires - and fulfil that desire in the process. There is no longer any ontological distance or fissure. The suture is immediate. It is the same with opinion polls, market research surveys and all those actions in Contemporary Alienation 195 which the great Delphic Oracle of Public Opinion is made to speak and to rave: they foretell social and political events and substitute them selves, like identikit pictures, for the real events, which end up reflecting them. Hence, as Boorstin writes, 'public opinion - once the public's expression - becomes more and more an image into which the public fits its expression. Public opinion becomes filled with what is already there. It is the people looking in the mirror.'3 So it is too with celebrities, stars and 'heroes of consumption': The hero stood for outside standards. The celebrity is a tautology . . . Celebrities are known primarily for their well-knownness. Yet the celebrity is usually nothing greater than a more publicized version of us. In imitating him,         fu     fu     fu     fu       simply imitating ourselves . . . By imitating a tautology, we ourselves become a tautology standing for what we stand for . . . We look for models, and we see our own image.4 And of television, Boorstin remarks: 'At home we begin to try to live according to the script of television programmes of happy families, which are themselves nothing but amusing quintessences of us.'s Like every great myth worth its salt, the myth of 'Consumption' has its discourse and its anti-discourse. In other words, the elated discourse on affluence is everywhere shadowed by a morose, moralizing, 'critical' counter-discourse on the ravages of consumer society and the tragic end to which it inevitably dooms society as a whole. That counter-discourse is to be heard everywhere. Not only is it found in intellectualist dis course, which is always ready to distance itself by its scorn for 'simple minded values' and 'material satisfactions', but it is now present within 'mass culture' itself: advertising increasingly parodies itself, integrating counter-advertising into its promotional technique. France-Soir, Paris Match, the radio, the TV, and ministerial speeches all contain as an obligatory refrain the lament on this 'consumer society', where values, ideals and ideologies are giving way to the pleasures of everyday life. We shall not soon forget Chaban-Delmas's famous flight of oratory: 'We have to control consumer society by giving it back some soul!' This endlessly repeated indictment is part of the game: it is the critical mirage, the anti-fable which rounds off the fable - the discourse of consumption and its critical undermining. Only the two sides taken together constitute the myth. We have, therefore, to allot to the 'critical' discourse and the moralizing protest their true responsibility for the elaboration of the myth. It is that discourse which locks us definitively into the mythic and prophetic teleology of the 'Civilization of the Object'. It is that discourse which, being itself much more fascinated by the Object than either common sense or the grassroots consumer, transfig ures it into a mythic and fascinated anti-object critique. The rebels of May 1968 did not escape this trap of reifying objects and consumption excessively by according them diabolical value, of denouncing them as such and building them up into a determining instance. And the real 196 Conclusion work of myth-making lies here. If all the denunciations, all the disquisi tions on 'alienation', and all the derisive force of pop and anti-art play so easily into establishment hands, that is because they are themselves part of the myth, which they round out by providing the counter-melody within the formal liturgy of the Object we spoke of at the beginning - and do so in a manner that is without doubt more perverse than the spontaneous adherence to consumer values. In conclusion, we shall say that this counter-discourse, which estab lishes no real distance, is as immanent in consumer society as any of its other aspects. This negative discourse is the intellectual's second home. Just as medieval society was balanced on God and the Devil, so ours is balanced on consumption and its denunciation. Though at least around the Devil heresies and black magic sects could organize. Our magic is white. No heresy is possible any longer in a state of affluence. It is the prophylactic whiteness of a saturated society, a society with no history and no dizzying heights, a society with no other myth than itself. But here we are once again speaking in morose, prophetic terms, caught in the trap of the Object and its apparent plenitude. Now, we know that the Object is nothing and that behind it stands the tangled void of human relations, the negative imprint of the immense mobiliza tion of productive and social forces which have become reified in it. We shall await the violent irruptions and sudden disintegrations which will come, just as unforeseeably and as certainly as May 1968, to wreck this white Mass. Notes Chapter 1 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1971, p. 87. 2 Contrary to a rather odd assertion in Mark Poster's book Jean Baudrillard: Selected Writings (Polity, 1988, p. 55, note 4), Flaine is not 'Baudrillard's parody of suburban communities around Paris' but a genuine ski resort in Haute-Savoie (Tr.). Chapter 2 1 This situation is almost ideally realized by a city like Berlin. Moreover, almost all science-fiction novels have as their theme the situation of a rational and 'affluent' Great City threatened with destruction from without or within by some great hostile force. Chapter 3 1 Tables appearing in the original French have been removed at the author's request (Tr.). 2 J.K. Galbraith, The Affluent Society, Penguin in association with Hamish Hamilton, Harmondsworth, 1962, p. 210. 3 There is in this sense an absolute difference between waste in our 'affluent societies', a waste that is a nuisance integrated into the economic system, which is a functional wastage not productive of collective value, and the destructive prodigality engaged in by all the so called 'societies of scarcity' in their festivals and sacrifices, this latter being waste 'by excess', in which the destruction of goods was a source of collective symbolic values. Breaking up old cars that have gone out of fashion or burning coffee in locomotives is in no sense festive. It is a deliberate, systematic destruction for strategic ends. So too is military expenditure (perhaps only advertising . . . ). The economic system cannot transcend itself in an act of festive waste, caught up as it is in its own alleged 'rationality'. It can only devour its excess of wealth as it were shamefully, practising a calculated destructiveness that is complementary to its productivity calculations. Chapter 4 1 The term 'inequality' is inappropriate. The equality !inequality opposition, ideo logically linked to the system of modern democratic values, only fully covers economic disparities and cannot figure in a structural analysis. 2 Or the 'Great Society', recently imported into France. 3 On this point, see Chapter 7 in relation to 'lowest common culture' and 'lowest common multiples'. 4 It is, of course, in its functioning as a system of social differentiation (2 above) that consumption takes on this unlimited dimension. As a system of communication and 198 The consumer society exchange (1 above), where it may be compared to language, a finite range of goods and services (like the finite material of linguistic signs) can very well suffice, as we see in primitive societies. Language [la langue] does not proliferate because there is no ambivalence of the sign at that level, that ambivalence being grounded in social hierarchy and simultaneous double determination. By contrast, a certain level of parole and style does give rise again to distinctive proliferation. 5 On this point, see Chapter 5, section 'Consumption as the Emergence and Control of New Productive Forces'. 6 This is the 'reserve army' of needs. 7 This growing differentiation does not necessarily signify a growing distance from the top to the bottom of the scale, a 'greater overall imbalance', but increasing discrimination, an increase in the quantity of distinctive signs within a hierarchy whose extremes have moved closer together. Relative 'democratization' and homogenization are accompanied by a related intensification in status competition. 8 In this sense, the distinction between 'real' and 'artificial' needs is also a false problem. 'Artificial needs' do, of course, mask the non-satisfaction of 'essential' needs (television instead of education). But this is secondary to generalized determination by growth (the expanded reproduction of capital), in respect of which the terms 'natural' and 'artificial' have no meaning. We might even say that this natural-artificial opposition, which implies a theory of human finalities, is itself an ideological product of growth. It is reproduced by growth and is functionally linked to it. 9 Les Temps modernes, October 1968. Chapter 5 1 Quoted by Galbraith, The New Industrial State, Signet, New York, 1967, epigraph to Chapter 10. 2 In the survey carried out by Selection du Reader's Digest (A. Piatier, 'Structures et perspectives de la consommation europeenne'), the pattern which emerges is not one of an immense middle class, as in the case of the USA, but that of a minority, a consumer elite (the As) serving as a model for a majority which does not yet possess that range of luxury goods (sports car, stereo, second horne) which every European worthy of the name must have. 3 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 215. 4 Ibid., p. 222. 5 This is the 'anti-coagulant' effect of advertising (Elgozy). 6 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 28l . 6 Ibid., p. 279. 8 Ibid., p. 280. 9 On this, see this chapter, section 'Consumption as the Emergence and Control of New Productive Forces'. 10 J. Baudrillard, 'The ideological genesis of needs', in For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, Telos, St Louis, 1981, pp. 63-87. 11 This paragraph has been slightly modified by the author (Tr.). 12 La Nef, no. 37. 13 Galbraith, The New Industrial State, p. 49. 14 On this point, see Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. Chapter 6 1 It is the same with relationships. The system is built upon a total liquidation of personal ties, of concrete social relations. It is to this extent that it becomes necessarily and Notes 199 systematically productive of relationship (public relations, human relations, etc.). The production of relationships has become one of the key sectors of production. And because they no longer have anything spontaneous about them, because they are produced, those relationships are necessarily fated, like all that is produced, to be consumed (unlike social relations, which are the unconscious product of social labour and not the result of deliberate, controlled industrial production: these are not 'consumed' but are, in fact, the site of social contradictions). On the production and consumption of human relations and social relationships, see Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. 2 D. Riesman, Abundance for What? And Other Essays, Chatto and Windus, London, 1964, p. 129. 3 D. Riesman (with N. Glazer and R. Denney), The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character, Doubleday Anchor, New York, n.d., pp. 98-9. 4 See Chapter 11, section 'Violence'. Chapter 7 1 The reference is to the Le President health clubs. See note 4 to Chapter 8 (Tr.). 2 If beauty is to be found in the 'figure', the career is defined by its 'profile'. Such connivances of vocabulary are significant. 3 See this chapter, section 'Pseudo-Event and Neo-Reality'. The term 'gadget' covers a rather different semantic field in French, referring in particular to objects which are not necessarily technical implements, but merely useless objects of a 'gimmicky' kind. How ever, since the French usage will be reasonably clear from the author's argument here, I have generally retained the term 'gadget', which has at least equally pejorative connota tions in English (Galbraith writes, 'The word gadget is itself a pejorative term for durable goods', The Affluent Society, p. 162) (Tr.). 4 Tirlipot is the name of a 1960s radio quiz game. 5 Le Monde, 28 September 1969. 6 There is, in this sense, a relationship of sorts between kitsch and snobbery. However, snobbery is linked, rather, to the aristocracy/bourgeoisie acculturation process and kitsch essentially to the rise of the 'middle' classes in a bourgeois industrial society. 7 But it is not a toy, as the toy has a symbolic function for the child. However, a 'new look' toy, a fashionable toy becomes a gadget once again simply by dint of such modishness. 8 The pure gadget, defined as something totally useless to anyone at all, would be an absurdity. 9 An annual French competition for artisans and inventors (Tr.). 10 See Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image, or What Happened to the American Dream, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1963. 11 The cubists were still searching for the 'essence' of space, seeking to unveil a 'secret geometry', etc. In Dada, Duchamp or the surrealists, objects were wrenched from their (bourgeois) functions to be set up in their subversive banality, in a reminder of their lost essence and of an order of authenticity evoked by way of the absurd. In Francis Ponge, the apprehension of the naked, concrete object is still the act of a - poetic - consciousness or source of perception. In short, whether poetic or critical, the whole of art, 'without which things would merely be what they are', is fuelled (before pop) by transcendence. 12 Cf. the Conclusion, section 'The Consumption of Consumption'. 13 Mario Amaya, Pop as Art: A Survey of the New Super Realism, Studio Vista, London, 1965. 14 In this sense, the truth of pop might be said to be wage labour and the advertising hoarding, not the contract and the art gallery. 200 The consumer society 15 'Popular' art is concerned not with objects, but always primarily with human beings and their actions. It would not paint cooked meats or the American flag, but a-man-eating or a-man-saluting-the-American-flag. 16 In fact we often read this 'terroristic' humour in it, but we do so out of critical nostalgia on our part. 17 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Sphere, London, 1967, p. 27. 18 It is easy to see how one can, in this sense, 'consume' language [du langage]. As soon as it becomes loaded with in-group connotations, and, instead of being a vehicle for meaning, turns into a group lexicon, a class or caste heritage (the style of the 'smart set', intellectual jargon; the political jargon of a party or grouping); as soon as it ceases to be a means of exchange and becomes a material of exchange for the internal usage of a group or class - its real function, under cover of conveying a message, being one of collusion and recognition; and as soon as, rather than putting meaning into circulation, it begins itself to circulate as password, as shibboleth, in a process of group tautology (the group speaking itself), then language is an object of consumption, a fetish. It is no longer being used as a language [langue], as a system of distinctive denotative signs, but consumed as a system of connotation, as a distinctive code. We find the same process in 'medical consumption'. There has been an extraordinary inflation of the demand for health care, closely linked to the rise in the standard of living. The line between 'justifiable' demand (though on what definition of a vital minimum and bio-psychosomatic equilibrium might it be considered justified?) and the consumer com pulsion for medical, surgical and dental treatment is becoming blurred. Medical practice is turning into the use of the doctor himlherself and this sumptuary, conspicuous use of the doctor/object, the medicine/object, joins the second home and the car as part of the panoply of social standing. Here again, the medication - and, particularly where the wealthier classes are concerned, the doctor (Balint: 'The medication most frequently dispensed in general practice is the doctor himse\f') - cease to be the means of achieving health, considered as a final goal, and become themselves the focus of the ultimate demand. They are then consumed, on the selfsame pattern of a diverting of the objective practical function into a mental manipulation and a sign-based calculus of a fetishistic type. We have, properly speaking, to distinguish between two levels of this 'consumption': the 'neurotic' demand for the giving of medication, for anxiety-reducing medical care. This demand is just as objective as the demand which arises from an organic ailment, but it leads into 'consumption' in so far as the doctor no longer has any specific value at this level: he is substitutable, as anxiety-reducer or care-provider, for any other process of partial regression: alcohol, shopping or collecting (the consumer 'collects' the doctor and medicines). The doctor is consumed as one-sign-among-others (just as a washing machine may be consumed as a mark of status and ease - see Chapter 7). At a deep level, then, what institutes 'medical consumption' is - beyond the neurotic logic of individuals - a social logic of status, which incorporates the doctor as sign (quite apart from any objective performance and on the same basis as any other value attribute) into a generalized system. We can see that it is on the abstraction (the reduction) of the medical function that medical consumption is established. We find this pattern of system atic abduction or rerouting [detournement] everywhere as the very principle of consumption. 19 Boorstin, The Image, p. 209. 20 This is why all forms of resistance to the introduction of advertising on TV or elsewhere are merely moralizing or archaic reactions. The problem lies at the level of the system of signification as a whole. 21 Boorstin, The Image, p. 213. 22 Ibid., p. 217. 23 Ibid., p. 219. Notes 201 Chapter 8 1 The reference in the hymn is, however, not to the body, but to the soul (Tr.). 2 The original cartes du tendre were, of course, actual 'maps' or charts depicting the course of love (Tr.). 3 See also this exemplary text from Vogue: A new wind is blowing through the world of beauty, a fresher, freer, healthier, less hypocritical wind of pride in one's body. Not pretentiousness, which is vulgar. But the honest awareness that our bodies are worth accepting, caring for, loving, if they are to be well used. We are happy that our knees are more supple, we are delighted with the length of our legs, with our lighter feet . . . (for these we use a mask as we do for the face . . . we massage our toes with an extraordinary 'supersonic' cream, we find ourselves a good chiropodist . . . see how on page 72). We are all for the new body-spray perfumes, which give a satiny finish right down to our toes. Left, mules in South African ostrich-feathers with embroidery by Lamel (Christian Dior). Etc. 4 In French. Ie phryntisme. The reference here is to the Greek courtesan Phryne, who 'when she saw that in spite of the eloquence of her defender Hyperides she was going to be condemned, . . unveiled her bosom, and by this sudden display of her charms so influenced her judges, that she was immediately acquitted' (Lempriere's Classical Dictionary, Bracken, London, 1984, p. 526) (Tr.). 5 The male equivalent of the Elle text is the advert for Le President entitled 'No pity for executives?' This is an admirable text, which encapsulates all the themes we have analysed here (narcissism, the revenge of the neglected body, functional 'recycling'), except that here the masculine model centres on 'physical fitness' and social success, whereas the feminine model focused on 'beauty' and 'seduction'. Forty years old. Modern civilization commands him to be young. The paunch which was once a symbol of social success is now synonymous with decline and the scrapheap. His superiors, his subordinates, his wife, his secretary, his mistress, his children and the girl in the microskirt he's chatting to at his table outside the cafe (with who knows what in mind) all judge him on the quality and style of his clothes, his choice of tie and after shave, the suppleness and slenderness of his body. He has to keep a watchful eye on everything: the crease in his trousers, his collar, his puns, his feet when he dances, his diet when he eats, his stamina when he is climbing stairs, his back when he makes a violent effort. If, only yesterday, efficiency in his work was enough, today he is required to possess both physical fitness and elegance. The myth of the healthy American businessman, part James Bond, part Henry Ford, confident and sure of himself, physically and psychologically well balanced, has taken its place in our civilization. Finding and keeping dynamic co-workers with pep and drive is the major concern of every business manager. The forty-year-old falls in with this image. This neo-Narcissus of modern times likes to take care of himself and tries to enjoy himself. He savours his diet, his medication, his physical training, the difficulty he has stopping smoking. Aware that his social success depends entirely on the image others have of him, that physical fitness is his trump card, the man of forty is looking for his second wind and his second youth. There follows the advert for Le President. There, it is chiefly fitness that is being: fitness, the magic word, that 'fairy godmother's gift' (after Narcissus, the fairies!), which managing directors, senior executives, journalists and doctors pursue 'in an air-conditioned, cocooned atmosphere' and 'using 37 sets of apparatus with pedals, wheels, weights, vibrations, levers and steel cables' (as one can see, both athleticism and phryneism, both 'fitness' and 'beauty', are partial to gadgetry). 6 In the technical sense of simulations where the conditions of weightlessness are simulated experimentally - or of mathematical models. 7 The truth of the body is desire. And this, being lack, cannot be shown. The most exhaustive exhibition of that desire merely highlights it as absence, and ultimately, merely 202 The consumer society censors it. Will we one day see photos in which erections are shown? This would still be done under the heading of fashion. The censors thus ultimately have nothing to fear, except from their own desire. 8 Norman O. Brown, Life against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History, Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, CT, p. 252. 9 On this point, see Chapter 6, section 'The Structural Models'. 10 Sexuality is no longer a celebration rune fete]. It is an erotic festival, with all that implies in terms of organization. Within the framework of that festival, everything is done also to revive 'polymorphous, perverse' sexuality. Cf. the first world fair of pornography in Copenhagen [this chapter, section 'The Sex-Exchange Standard']. 11 We find the same process in the 'consumption' of Technology. Without wishing to contest the enormous impact of technological progress on social progress, one can see how technology itself falls into the domain of consumption, dividing into a daily practice 'liberated' by innumerable 'functional' gadgets and a transcendent myth of (capital T) Technology, the combination of the two making it possible to head off all the revolutionary potentialities of a total social practice of technology. See Utopie, no. 2-3, May 1969, 'La Pratique socia Ie et la technique'. 12 The French verb solliciter contains an ambiguity, referring at times to a demand or even manipulation [the expression solliciter des textes implies forcing texts or documents to yield significations which they do not clearly contain (Tr.)l, at times to solicitude and gratification. See Chapter 10, 'The Mystique of Solicitude'. 13 The Danish parliament (Tr.). 14 This line does not actually seem to appear in either of Rimbaud's 'Villes' poems (commonly known as 'Villes l' and 'Villes II') (Tr.). 15 This phrase occurs with slight variations of emphasis in two letters which Rimbaud wrote in May 1871. The first of these is to Georges Izambard, the second to Paul Demeny. Originals and translations of both letters are to be found in Wallace Fowlie's Rimbaud: Complete Works, Selected Letters, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1966, pp. 302-11 (Tr.). Chapter 9 1 It might be thought that time is, in this respect, opposed to all other objects, whose 'use-value' traditionally lies in being possessed, utilized, employed to advantage. But this is without doubt a profound error. The true use-value of objects is doubtless also to be consumed, to be expended 'as pure loss' - a 'symbolic' use-value which is everywhere scored out [barn?e] and replaced by 'utilitarian' use-value. 2 But the goal of the operation here remains strictly individual. In the archaic festival, time is never expended 'for oneself': it is the time of collective prodigality. Chapter 10 1 Twenty per cent of national income for France. 2 Advertising itself, as an economic process, may be regarded as a 'free celebration', financed by social labour but delivered to everyone 'with nothing apparently given in return' and presenting itself as collective gratification (see later in this chapter). 3 Cf. Lagneau in Le Fa ire-Valair, 'Advertising is the wrapping up of an unbearable economic logic in the thousand seductive artifices of "exemption from payment", which negate it the better to allow it to operate.' G. Lagneau, Le Faire-Valoir, E.M.E., Paris, 1969. 4 On this problem, see the articles by J. Marcus-Steiff and P. Kende in the Revuefran aise de sociologie, 1969, X, 3. 5 In German, the word werben, which means to ask for someone's hand in marriage and Notes 203 hence implies loving concern [sollicitude amoureuse], also means competition, rivalry and advertising (commercial solicitation). 6 Riesman et a!., The Lonely Crowd, p. 4l. 7 Ibid., p. 83. 8 To take an example, 'In fact,' writes a specialist in sales promotion, 'if, before it was presented to the public, Giscard d'Estaing's programme had been got into shape by an agency like Publicis, using the methods that were so successful in the Saint-Gobain affair, then French voters would probably have backed him.' And he adds: 'When you think of all the trouble you take to win the public's favour when you launch a new bar of soap, bringing all the modern resources of radio, TV and cinema into play, you are amazed by the antiquated methods the government employ when they want to "sell" an economic and financial programme running into billions of francs to the mass of the French people: 9 Riesman et al., The Lonely Crowd, p. 224ff. 10 Ibid., p. 225. Chapter 11 'Objectless craving' has its counterpart in 'objectless raving'. 2 Galbraith, The Affluent Society, p. 14. 3 Erostratus or Eratostratus was an Ephesian who burnt down the temple of Diana solely with the object of achieving eternal fame. The Ephesians subsequently passed a law making it illegal to mention his name (Tr.). 4 Economists and psychologists base their thinking wholly on equivalence and ration ality: they postulate that, in all processes, the subject is always positively orientated, in a state of need, towards the object. If the need is satisfied, that is all there is to it. They forget that there is no 'satisfied need'; a completed process, where there is only positivity, is something which is never found: there is only desire and desire is ambivalent. 5 Hence the very logical (American) idea of a motel for the suicidal where, for a reasonable price, a 'suicide service', provided like any other social service (though not covered by social security'), ensures that you enjoy optimum conditions for death and undertakes to effect your suicide effortlessly, with a smile. 6 The original French text here is 'Ie malaise de la civilisation', the title of the standard French translation of Freud's Vas Unbehagen in der Kultur (English: Civilization and its Discontents) (Tr.). 7 I.5. Mill, On Liberty, ed. H.B. Acton, Dent/Dutton, London/New York, 1972, p. 124 (my italics, JB). Conclusion 1 There have been at least three versions of this film. From what he says, Baudrillard is clearly not referring to the first of these (Stellan Rye, 1913) and it seems most likely that he is familiar with the 1926 film by the Dutch-born writer-director Henrik Galeen (who was also involved in the earlier production). A further German version was made in 1936 by the Chicago-born director Arthur Robison (Tr.). 2 Like all myths, this one also seeks to ground itself in an original event. In this case, it is the so-called 'Revolution of Affluence', a historical revolution of Well-Being, the last revolution of Western man after the Renaissance, the Industrial Revolution and the Political Revolutions. Consumption thereby presents itself as the opening of a new era - the final era of achieved Utopia and the end of history. 3 Boorstin, The Image, p. 240. 4 Ibid., p. 83. 5 Ibid., p. 259.   1 From For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign by Jean Baudrillard (St. Louis, Mo: Telos press Ltd., 1981) CHAPTER FIVE THE ART AUCTION: SIGN EXCHANGE AND SUMPTUARY VALUE It may seem strange to be analyzing the ideological process somewhere other than in the traditional, political or cultural sanctuaries. But the point is precisely that the market for paintings and the auction sale of the work of art permit us to decipher the articulation, and thus the process, of ideological labor because they are situated in the contexts of economic power and the cultural field. The auction, this crucible of the interchange of values, where economic value, sign value and symbolic value transfuse according to the rules of the game, can be considered as an ideological matrix — one of the shrines of the political economy of the sign. It is a question of decoding the birth of the sign form in the same way that Marx was able to uncover the birth of the commodity form in the Critique of Political Economy. In consumption generally, economic exchange value (money) is converted into sign exchange value (prestige, etc.); but this operation is still sustained by the alibi of use value. By contrast, the auction of the work of art has this notable characteristic: that economic exchange value, in the pure form of its general equivalent, money, is exchanged there for a pure sign, the painting. So it is an experimental terrain, simultaneously collective and institutional, for separating out the operation of this sign value.1 The decisive action is one of a simultaneous double reduction — that of exchange value (money) and of symbolic value (the painting as an oeuvre) — and of their transmutation into sign value (the signed, appraised painting as a luxury value and rare object) by expenditure and agonistic competition. 1. The Other Face of Political Economy In expenditure, money changes meaning. This fact, established in the auction, can be transferred as a hypothesis to the whole sphere of consumption. The act of consumption is never simply a purchase (reconversion of exchange value into use value); it is also an expenditure (an aspect as radically neglected by political economy as by Marx); that is to say, it is wealth manifested, and a manifest destruction of wealth. It is that value, deployed beyond exchange value and founded upon the latter’s destruction, that invests the object purchased, acquired, appropriated, with its differential sign value. It is not the quantity of money that takes on value, as in the economic logic of equivalence, but rather money spent, sacrificed, eaten up according to a logic of difference and challenge. Every act of purchase is thus simultaneously an economic act and a transeconomic act of the production of differential sign value. Certainly in everyday consumption the specific (and fundamental) aspects of the auction are largely effaced: the direct experience of competition, the challenge, the agonistic community of peers, etc., which make it such a fascinating moment, the equivalent of poker or the fête. But behind the purchase (or 1 The very considerable problems posed by the analysis of use value will be taken up later in the chapter, Beyond Use Value. 2 individual reappropriation of use value) there always remains the moment of expenditure, which even in its banality presupposes something of a competition, a wager, a challenge, a sacrifice and thus a potential community of peers and an aristocratic measure of value. Let us not be mistaken: it is this, and not the satisfaction of needs, that occasionally turns consumption into a passion, a fascinating game, something other than functional economic behavior: it becomes the competitive field of the destruction of economic value for the sake of another type of value. The process of production and systematization of economic exchange value has been described as essential, and in fact it is: political economy is this immense transmutation of all values (labor, knowledge, social relations, culture, nature) into economic exchange value. Everything is abstracted and reabsorbed into a world market and in the preeminent role of money as a general equivalent. This aspect of the analysis has been privileged (for historical and ideological reasons that have nothing to do with “scientific objectivity,” and which should be analyzed more fully, even in Marx). Thus the equally essential, equally generalized process has been largely neglected — a process that is neither the inverse nor the residue nor the relay of production: that immense process of the transmutation of economic exchange value into sign exchange value. This is the process of consumption considered as a system of sign exchange value: not consumption as traditional political economy defines it (reconversion of economic exchange value into use value, as a moment of the production cycle), but consumption considered as the conversion of economic exchange value into sign exchange value. At this point, the field of political economy, articulated only through exchange value and use value, explodes and must be entirely reanalyzed as generalized political economy, which implies the production of sign exchange value in the same way and in the same movement as the production of material goods and of economic exchange value. The analysis of the production of signs and of culture thus does not impose itself as exterior, ulterior, and “superstructural” in relation to that of material production; it imposes itself as a revolution of political economy itself, generalized by the theoretical and practical irruption of the political economy of the sign. All efforts to autonomize this field of consumption (that is, of the systematic production of signs) as an object of analysis are mystifying: they lead directly to culturalism. But it is necessary to see that the same ideological mystification results from autonomizing the field of material production as a determining agency. Those who specify culture (sign production) in order to circumscribe it as superstructure are also culturalists without knowing it: they institute the same split as the cultural idealists, and constrict the field of political economy just as arbitrarily. If culture, consumption and signs must be analyzed as ideology this is not achieved by banishing them, or expelling them to an outer field, but, on the contrary, by integrating them into the very structures of political economy. Yet this implies that the traditional boundaries of political economy, canonized by bourgeois economic science as well as by Marxist analysis, should be disregarded. And the resistances to this are strong, for they are of all orders: theoretical, political, phantasmagorical. Yet today only a generalized political economy can define a revolutionary theory and practice. Insofar as the market for paintings is specifically concerned, it may be said that it is the appropriation of the paintings as signs which acts as a factor of legitimation of economic and social power. But that gets us almost nowhere. We are still within the political vulgate: culture annexed and manipulated by the dominant class. The same is said of “needs,” “consumption,” leisure or sex. The dominant class would hold a sort of jus primae noctis over culture. Not content to exploit the “reserve of manpower,” this class would exploit the reserve of signs, the system of values, in order to confuse the class conflict and mystify proletarian consciousness. But where do these signs originate? Are they already inherent in things, in a social nature, so that it is enough to forcibly appropriate them? Magical vision. And how can signs or myths be articulated upon an objective social and economic condition, in order to confuse its meaning? There is little use in appealing to the “consciousness” argument! Moreover, why would the dominant class have need of culture if the economic is truly the determining instance? More profoundly, what is a signification? In what social relation is it produced? What is the mode of production of significations? The “capitalist” mode of production? Absurd. Sign values are produced by a certain type of social labor. But the production of differences, of differential hierarchical systems, is not to be confused with the extortion of economic surplus value, nor does it result 3 from it. Between the two, another type of labor intervenes which transforms economic value and surplus value into sign value: it is a sumptuary operation, devouring (consummation) and surpassing economic value according to a radically different type of exchange. Yet in a certain way it also produces a surplus value: domination, which is not to be confused with economic privilege and profit. The latter are in a way only the primary material and springboard for a political operation involving the transfiguration of power by signs. Domination is thus linked to economic power, but it does not “emanate” from it automatically and mysteriously; it issues from it through a reworking of economic value. As a result of having forgotten this very specific labor, Marxist analysis today finds itself in the same position with respect to the field of ideology as the bourgeois economists before (and since) Marx vis-à-vis material production: the real source of value and the real process of production are skipped over. It is from neglect of this social labor of sign production that ideology derives its transcendence; signs and culture appear enveloped in a “fetishism,” a mystery equivalent to, and contemporaneous with that of the commodity. Critical theorists of the political economy of the sign are rare. They are exiled, buried under Marxist (or neo-Marxist) terrorist analysis. Veblen and Goblot2 are the great precursors of a cultural analysis of class which, beyond the “dialectical materialism” of productive forces, examines the logic of sumptuary values which assures and perpetuates through its code the hegemony of the dominant class, and, in a way, shelters the latter, through its “transsubstantiation” of values, from economic revolutions and their social repercussions. In the economic order it is the mastery of accumulation, of the appropriation of surplus value, which is essential. In the order of signs (of culture), it is mastery of expenditure that is decisive, that is, a mastery of the transsubstantiation of economic exchange value into sign exchange value based on a monopoly of the code. Dominant classes have always either assured their domination over sign values from the outset (archaic and traditional societies), or endeavoured (in the capitalist bourgeois order) to surpass, to transcend, and to consecrate their economic privilege in a semiotic privilege, because this later stage represents the ultimate stage of domination. This logic, which comes to relay class logic and which is no longer defined by ownership of the means of production but by the mastery of the process of signification; and which activates a mode of production radically different from that of material production (and which for this reason escapes “Marxist” analysis) is found in its entirety, though microscopically, in the art auction. 2. Difference from Economic Exchange 1. Like the game (poker, etc.), the art auction is always both a ritual and a unique event. The rules are arbitrary and fixed, yet one never knows exactly what will take place, nor afterward exactly what has happened, because it involves a dynamic of personal encounter, an algebra of individuals, as opposed to the economic operation where values are exchanged impersonally, arithmetically. 2. This personal character of the exchange implies the insularity (unicité) of the place (one cannot participate without being present), and above all, the concrete integrality (unicité) of the process (the time, order, rhythm, tempo are essential elements of the bidding). In the altercation and the out-bidding, each moment depends on the previous one and on the reciprocal relation of partners. Hence there is a specific development, which is different from the abstract time of economic exchange. 3. There is no interplay of supply and demand, as in the market, with a maximal approximation of the exchange value offered and the use value anticipated. The mercantile auction that reaches a point of equilibrium of supply and demand is found, for example, in a fish auction. But in the art auction, at the moment of bidding, exchange value and use value are no longer correlated according to an economic calculus. The anticipated use value (if there is one) does not increase during the auction. In fact, the particular activity of the auction institutes a specific relation and occurs outside use value. Once the latter has been put out of play, exchange value is no longer offered (in exchange for); it is wagered (mise en jeu). 2 Veblen, Theory of the Leisure Class and Goblot, La Barrière et le Niveau. 4 At once, it ceases to be exchange value and the whole situation is transferred out of the realm of the economic. It does not, however, cease to be an exchange, although it no longer takes the form of supply and demand, but of reciprocal wager. Thus the auction simultaneously institutes: — a transmutation of value and of the economic coordinates; — another type of social relation. Transmutation of Value In the crucial moment of the auction, money is nullified as a divisible exchange value and is transsubstantiated by its expenditure into an indivisible sumptuary value. Thus it becomes the homolog of the painting as a sign, a unique and indivisible object. There is no longer an equivalence, but an aristocratic parity3 established between money, which has become a suptuary material through the loss of its economic exchange value, and the canvas, which has become a sign of prestige (hence an element of the restricted corpus that we call “painting”) through the loss of its symbolic value.4 Social Relation In the sumptuary act, money is nullified as a general equivalent, as form and so as a specific (capitalist) social relation regulated by this form. The social relation instituted in this act by the auction is still one of aristocratic parity (among partners). Contrary to commercial operations, which institute a relation of economic rivalry between individuals on the footing of formal equality, with each one guiding his own calculation of individual appropriation, the auction, like the fete or the game, institutes a concrete community of exchange among peers. Whoever the vanquisher in the challenge, the essential function of the auction is the institution of a community of the privileged who define themselves as such by agonistic speculation upon a restricted corpus of signs. Competition of the aristocratic sort seals their parity (which has nothing to do with the formal equality of economic competition), and thus their collective caste privilege with respect to all others, from whom they are no longer separated merely by their purchasing power, but by the sumptuary and collective act of the production and exchange of sign values.5 Here is the matrix of ideology — in the coherent logic of a system of production, exchange and social relations that is radically different from the system of production, exchange and social relations based on the economic. Ideology is not a mysterious duping (trucage) of consciousness; it is a social logic that is substituted for another (and which resolves the latter’s contradictions), thus changing the very definition of value. In our failure to recognize this, we have always reverted back to the rather embarrassing psychology of “interiorization.” But whence arises this strange perversion of “consciousness” — mystifying itself, and abandoning itself of “ideological values” — when the social actors who are the subjects of this 3 Cf. the chapter below on Symbolic Value and Aesthetic Function. 4 “The price at which a canvas is sold is not the measure of its value in the same way as for an article of consumption. The price only has meaning at the very instant of sale, by the game of competition in which it is the relative equivalent of the absolute values and significations to which the painting refers.” P. Dard and J. Michner, Etude sur l’Exchange de Valeur. In fact, it is no longer a price but a wager (enjeu). Moreover, for real players, money won in the game remains marked by it and cannot be spent for useful economic purposes: it must be put back into the game, poured back into it, “burned” — in a way, it is the part maudite of Bataille. 5 “Within this community there is a traffic of paintings on the basis of a competition among peers, while from the point of view of the global society, paintings are retained in and by this community — that is, the latter functions on the basis of a social discrimination. Yet this community presents itself as open by the competitive aspect of acquisition.... There we are at the frontiers of strategies of domination, where the possibility of individual mobility masks social discrimination.” P. Dard and J. Michner, Etude sur l’Echange de Valeur. 5 consciousness continue to produce their “objective” social relations? Indeed, when consciousness decides to flip over to the “objective” side, it becomes revolutionary, and we call it the prise de conscience! What a strange bourgeois novel psychology is — yet it profoundly infects revolutionary theory. In fact, what is called the “psychology” of the art lover is also in its entirety a reduction from the system of exchange. The singularity that he asserts — that fetishist passion for the object lived as an elective affinity — is established on his recognition as peer, by virtue of a competitive act, in a community of the privileged. He is the equal of the canvas itself, whose unique value resides in the relation of parity, of statutory privilege, which, as a sign, it maintains with the other terms of the limited corpus of paintings. Hence, the “elitist” affinity between the amateur and the canvas that psychologically connotes the very sort of value, of exchange and of aristocratic social relation that is instituted by the auction. The passion of the amateur is ignited by the latent summation, by the exalting and continual obsession of all other amateurs, just as the fetishized value of the canvas, his mana is made from: — its differential reference to all the other canvases in the same sublime sphere of status; — its pedigree, its genealogy, that is, its signature and the cycles of its successive owners. Thus, it is not the psychological relation of the individual to the object that gives birth to fetishism and that sustains the principle of exchange. “Object Fetishism” never supports exchange in its principle, but the social principle of exchange supports the fetishized value of the object. 3. Economic Power and Domination There is another ideological reduction: that which makes the painting a commodity pure and simple. No, here it is not a question of the expanded reproduction of capital and of the capitalist class; it is a question of the production of a caste by the collective grace of a play of signs, and of the production of these signs by the destruction of economic value. Something similar to this sumptuary exchange and this aristocratic model, but weakened and geared down, diffuses through the whole system of consumption and provides its ideological efficacy. It seems absurd to speak of a “democratized” logic of caste. Yet consumption is instituted on the basis of the exchange of differences, of a distinctive material and thus of a potential community, which, however little remains of it — and precisely because nothing of it remains — is nevertheless articulated upon a fiction of aristocratic parity. The difference — a major one — between the aristocratic potlatch and consumption is that today differences are produced industrially, they are bureaucratically programmed in the form of collective models. They no longer arise in the personal reciprocity of challenge and exchange. Only the mass-mediatized simulacra (simulacre) of competition operate in the statutory rivalry. This latter no longer has the real, distinctive function that it still had in Veblen: the great dinosaurs of “wasteful expenditure” are changed into innumerable individuals pledged to a parody of sacrificial consumption, mobilized as consumers by the order of production. Expenditure has thus radically changed its meaning. The fact remains that it is because the collective phantom of lost (sumptuary) values is reactivated in expenditure and in mass-mediatized consumption, that this practice can be lived individually as gratification, as liberty, as fulfillment — and so act as ideology. Even the simulation model of a differential aristocratic code still acts as a powerful factor of integration and of control, as participation in the same “rule of the game.” Everywhere prestige haunts our industrial societies, whose bourgeois culture is never more than the phantom of aristocratic values. Everywhere the magic of the code, the magic of an elective and selective community, fused together by the same rules of the game and the same system of signs, is collectively reproduced, beyond economic value and on the basis of it. Everywhere this process comes to penetrate class conflicts, everywhere — diluted over the entire extent of the society, whatever the economic status and class condition — it acts to the advantage of the dominant class. It is the keystone of domination. It is not automatically dismantled by the revolutionary logic of productive forces, by the “dialectical” process of capital or by the traditional critique of political economy. Only a critique of the political economy of the sign can analyze how the present mode of domination is able to regain, integrate and simultaneously take advantage of all the modes of production — not only of the capitalist mode of production, but of all “previous,” “archaic” modes of production and exchange, infra- or transeconomic. Only such a critique can analyze how at the very heart of the economic the mode of 6 domination reinvents (or reproduces) the logic and the strategy of signs, of castes, of segregation, and of discrimination; how it reinstates the feudal logic of personal relations or even that of the gift exchange and of reciprocity, or of agonistic exchange — in order simultaneously to thwart and crown the “modern” socio-economic logic of class. But perhaps economic exploitation and “class” domination are at bottom only a “historic” variant and a detour in the immense genealogy of the forms of social domination. Perhaps contemporary society is once again becoming primarily a society of domination by signs, hence giving rise to the total demand for a “cultural revolution,” which implies the whole process of ideological production — the theoretical basis of which can only be given by a political economy of the sign. 4. Symbolic Value and the Aesthetic Function What happens to symbolic value in this whole operation, to the value peculiar to the “work of art”? It does not appear anywhere. It is repudiated, absent. Parallel to the ascension of economic exchange value into sign value, there is a reduction of symbolic value into sign value. On either side, economic exchange value and symbolic value lose their own status and become satellites of sign value. At the level of paintings, manipulated as supersigns, symbolic value is resolved into an aesthetic function, that is, it only operates inter linea, behind the operation of the sign, as a reference-alibi, as a sublime rationalization of the sumptuary operation.6 Repudiated as symbolic labor, the painting acts as: — distinctive material, the foundation of the “noble” and of restrained exchange; — and as universal “aesthetic” value — it doubles itself as an idea of painting serving to legitimize the operation in the absolute. But this absolute is an alibi. We have seen that the true value of the painting is its genealogical value (its “birth”: the signature and the aura of its successive transactions: its pedigree). Just as the cycle of successive gifts in primitive societies charges the object with more and more value, so the painting circulates from inheritor to inheritor as a title of nobility, being charged with prestige throughout its history. Here, by the very circulation of signs a sort of surplus value is produced which must be radically distinguished from economic surplus value. It does not create profit, but legitimacy and it is with this that the art lover identifies himself by his economic sacrifice in the auction. Thus for caste members the only real values are those produced and exchanged within the caste (similarly for Goblot’s bourgeoisie, for whom originality, virtue, genius, etc., all the “universal” values, do not compare with regard to “distinction,” the specific value of class — or of caste). The caste of partners knows at bottom that the veritable status, the veritable legitimacy, the reproduction of the social relation, and so the perpetuation of the dominant class “in its essence,” is enacted in the aristocratic manipulation of works as the material of sign exchange. At bottom it disdains the “aesthetic,” “art,” the symbolic, and “culture” which, as “universal” values, are barely good for collective consumption. Aesthetic enjoyment, spiritual commerce with the works, and the values labelled “absolute” are all that is left to those who cannot aspire to the privileged potlatch.7 The process of ideology in its totality thus acts on the simultaneous operation: — of a system of restricted exchange upon a limited corpus and in the mode of aristocratic parity competition; 6 From that moment on, the economic can also serve as rationalization. The market for paintings is sometimes placed under the rubric of “love of art,” sometimes under that of “good investment.” 7 All else being equal, it is the same discrimination that dedicates the immense majority to use value in consumption, and to the functional enjoyment of products — the dominant class strategically reserves for itself the manipulation of exchange value, of capital and of surplus value. 7 — of a system of exchange of “universal” values for the use of all, in the mode of formal equality. Still in the realm of painting, it is interesting in this sense to confront the reciprocal function of the institution of the market and of the auction with the institution of the museum. One might believe that, by removing the works from this private parallel market to “nationalize” them, the museum returns them to a sort of collective ownership and so to their “authentic” aesthetic function. In fact, the museum acts as a guarantee for the aristocratic exchange. It is a double guarantee: — just as a gold bank, the public backing of the Bank of France, is necessary in order that the circulation of capital and private speculation be organized, so the fixed reserve of the museum is necessary for the functioning of the sign exchange of paintings. Museums play the role of banks in the political economy of paintings: — not content to act as an organic guarantee of speculation in art, the museum acts as an agency guaranteeing the universality of painting and so also the aesthetic enjoyment (a socially inessential value, it has been seen) of all others. 5. Conclusion In the auction and the art market we wished to comprehend a sort of nucleum of the strategy of values, a sort of concrete space-time, strategic moment and matrix in the process of ideology, which latter is always the production of sign value and of coded exchange. This economy of values is a political economy. It goes well beyond economic calculation and concerns all the processes of the transmutation of values, all those socially produced transitions from one value to another, from one logic to another logic of value which may be noted in determinate places and institutions — and so it also concerns the connection and implication of different systems of exchange and modes of production. The critique of this general political economy of value is the only one which today can recapture Marx’s analysis on a global level. And it is the only one which can make this “beyond value” (au-dela de la valeur) appear theoretically as a basis for the practical overthrow of political economy. NB Objects other than paintings, of course, could be analyzed in the same terms: for example, knowledge. The institutional space-time of the competitive community is then the examination, better yet the national entrance examination. It is there that the “transsubstantiation of profane knowledge into sacred knowledge” operates, that “bureaucratic baptism of knowledge” (Marx), whose function with respect to the baccalauréat, the social threshold of the caste, has been well analyzed by Goblot. The same operation of transmutation of knowledge as a universal value into knowledge as sign value, as a title of nobility, is accompanied by the same legitimation, the same discrimination of all the peers who participate in the white mass, in this sacrament. One could also analyze the academic congress (of scholars, of intellectuals, of sociologists) as places of transmission, of hereditary reproduction of the intelligentsia and of a privileged community on the basis of an agonistic debauch of signs. Conferences are almost as useful to the advancement of knowledge as horse races and parimutuels to the advancement of the equine race (horses and races, moreover, as well as the parallel market of sumptuary values, would be an excellent object for study). Translated by Charles Levin Originally published in: Pour une critique de l’économie politique du signe, Paris: Gallimard, 1972    PREFACE A specter haunts the revolutionary imagination : the phantom of production. Everywhere it sustains an unbridled romanticism of productivity . The critical theory of the mode of production does not touch the princzple of production. All the concepts it articulates describe only the dialectical and historical genealogy of the contents of production, leaving production as a form intact . This form reemerges, idealized, behind the critique of the capitalist mode of production. Through a strange contagion, this. form of production only reinforces revolutionary discourse as a language of productiv ity. From the liberation of productive forces in the unlimited "textual productivity'' of Tel Quel to Deleuze's factory-machine productivity of the uncons cious (including the "labor" of the uncon scious) , no revolution can place itself under any other sign. The general formula is that of a productive Eros . Social wealth or language , meaning or value, sign or phantasm - everything is "pro ducedY according to a "labor . " If this is the truth of capital and of political economy, it is taken up whole by the revolution only to capital's benefit. The capitalist system of production is to be subverted in the name of an authentic and radical productivity. The capitalist law of value is to be abolished in the name of a de-alienated hyperproductivity, a productive hyperspace . Capital develops the 1 8 productive forces but also restrains them : they must be liberated. The exchange of signifieds has always hidden the "labor" of the signifier : let us liberate the signifier and the textual production of meaning! The unconscious is surrounded in social, linguistic, and Oedipal structures : let us give it back its brute energy ; let us restore it as a productive machine! Everywhere productivist dis course reigns and, whether this productivity has objective ends or is deployed for itself, it is itself the form of value . It is the leitmotif both of the system and of a radical challenge - but such a consens us is suspect. If the discourse of production is only a revolutionary metaphor - the detour and return of a concept which, in essence, emanates from political economy and obeys its reality principle - then this metaphor is dangerous if it is to designate a radical alternative . Or if the alternative is not radical and its contamination by productivist discourse signifies more than a metaphoric infection, the virtual impossibility of thinking beyond or outside the general scheme of production, then it is in counter dependence on the dominant scheme.l But isn't this dominant scheme, which metaphor izes all azimuths , itself merely a metaphor? Is the reality principle it imposes anything but a code , a cipher, or a system of interpretation? Marx shattered the fiction of homo economicus, the myth which sums up the whole process of the naturalization of l. Evidently Marx played an essential role in the rooting of this productivist metaphor. It was he who definitively radicalized and rationalized the concept of production, who " dialectized" it and gave it its revolutionary title of nobility. And it is in large part by unconditional reference to Marx that this concept pursues its prodigious career. PREFACE 1 9 the system of exchange value, the market, and surplus value and its forms . But he did so in the name of labor power's emergence in action , of man's own power to give rise to value by his labor (pro - ducere). Isn't this a similar fiction , a similar naturalization - another wholly arbitrary conven tion, a simulation model bound to code all human material and every contingency of desire and exchange m terms of value, finality, and production? If so , production would be nothing but a code imposing this type of decipherment , the decipherment) where there is properly neither finality, cipher, nor value. In rational terms , this gigantic secondary elaboration hallucinates man's predestination for the objective transformation of the world (or for the "production" of oneself : today's generalized humanis t theme - it is no longer a question of "being" oneself but of "producing" oneself, from cons cious activity to the primitive "productions" of desire. Everywhere man has learned to reflect on himself, to assume himself, to posit himself according to this scheme of production which is assigned to him as the ultimate dimension of value and meaning. At the level of all political economy there is something of what L acan des cribes in the mirror stage : through this scheme of production, this mirror of production, the human species comes to consciousness [ la prise de conscience] in the imaginary. Production, l abor , value, everything through which an objective world emerges and through which man recognizes himself objectively - this is the imaginary. Here man is embarked o n a continual deciphering o f himself through his works, finalized by his shadow (his own end), reflected by this operational mirror, this sort of ideal of a productivist ego . This process occurs not 20 only in the materialized form of an economic obsession with efficiency determined by the system of exchange value, but more profoundly in this overdetermination by the code , by the mirror of political economy : in the identity that man dons with his own eyes when he can think of himself only as something to produce, to transform , or bring about as value . This remarkable phantasm is confused with that of representation, in which man becomes his own signified for himself and enjoys hi mself as the content of value and meaning in a process of self-expression and self- accumulation whose form escapes him . It is further clarified (despite the exegetical prowess of structuralist M arxists) that the analysis of the form representation (the status of the sign, of the language that directs all Western thought) - the critical reduction of this form in its collusion with the order of production and political economy - es caped Marx. It is no longer worthwhile to make a radical critique of the order of representation in the name of production and of its revolutionary formula. These two orders are inseparable and, paradoxical though it may seem , M arx did not subject the form production to a radical analysis any more than he did the form representation. These are the two great unanalyzed forms of the imaginary 2 of political economy that imposed their li mits on him. The dis course of production and the discourse of repres entation are the mirror b y which the system of political economy comes to be reflected i n the imaginary and reproduced there as the determinant instance . 2 . A term developed by Jacques Lacan and later used by C. Castoriadis to denote collective values that provide for unitary meaning but are logically unprovable . [Translator's note] I . THE CONCEPT O F LAB OR In order to achieve a radical critique of political economy, f.j_s;pot enough to unmask what is hidden behind the-.__concept of consumption : the anthro pology of needs and of use value. We must also unmask everything hidden behind the concepts of production, mode of production, productive forces, relations of produc tion, etc . All the fundamental concepts of Marxist analys is must be questioned, starting from its own requirement of a radical critique and transcendence of political economy. What is axi omatic about productive forces or about the dialectical genesis of modes of production from which springs all revolutionary theory? What is axiomatic about the generic richness o f man who is labor power, about the motor of history, o r about history itself, which is only "the production by men of their material life?" "The first his torical act is thus the production of the means to satisfy these needs , the production of material life itself. And indeed this is an historical act, a fundamental condition of all history, which today, as thousands of years ago , must daily and hourly be fulfilled merely in order to sustain human life . " 1 The liberation of productive forces is confused with the liberation of man : is this a revolutionary 1 . The German Ideology (New York : International Publishers, 1947), p. 1 6 . 22 CHAPTER I formula or that of political economy itself? Almost no one has doubted such ultimate evidence, es pecially not M arx, for whom men "begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of subsistence . . . "2 (Why must man's vocation always be to distinguish himself from animals? Humanism is an idee fixe which also comes from political economy- but we will leave that for now. ) But is man's existence an end for which he must find the means? These innocent little phras es are already theoretical conclusions : the separation of the end from the means is the wildest and most naive postulate about the human race . Man has needs . Does he have needs? Is he pledged to satisfy them? Is he labor power (by which he separates himself as means from himself as his own end)? These prodigious metaphors of the system that dominates us are a fable of political economy retold to generations of revolu tionaries infected even in their political radicalism by the conceptual virus es of this same political economy. Critique of Use Value and La bor Power In the distinction between exchange value and use value , Marxism shows its strength but also its weakness . The presupposition of use value - the hypothesis of a concrete value beyond the abstraction of exchange value, a human purpose of the commodity in the moment of its direct relation of utility for a subject - is only the effect of the sys tem of exchange value, a concept produced and 2. Ibid., p. 7. THE CONCEPT OF LABO R 2 3 developed by i t . 3 Far from designating a realm beyond political economy, use value is only the horizon of exchange value. A radical questioning of the concept of consumption begins at the level of needs and products. But this critique attains its full scope in its extension to that other commodity, la bor power. It is the concept of production, then, which is submitted to a radical critique. We must not forget that according to M arx himself the revolutionary originality of his theory comes from releasing the concept of labor power from its status as an unusual commodity whose insertion in the cycle of production under the name of use value carries the X element, a differential extra-value that generates surplus value and the whole process of capital . (Bourgeois economics would think instead of simple "labor" as one factor of production among others in the economic process. ) The history of Marx's concept of the use value of labor power is complex. With the concept of labor , Adam Smith attacked the Physiocrats and the exchangists. In turn , Marx deconstructed labor into a double concept of labor power commodity : abstract social labor (exchange value) and concrete labor (use value) . He insisted on the need to maintain these two aspects in all their force. Their articulation alone could help decipher objectively the process of capitalist l abor . To A. Wagner, wh o reproached him for neglecting use value, Marx replied : " . . . the vir o bscurus overlooks the fact that even in the analysis of the commodity I do not stop at the d ouble manner in which it is represented , but 3 . Cf. Baudrillard, Pour une critique de l'economie poli tique du signe (Paris : Gallimard, 1 972). 24 CHAPTER 1 immediately go on to say that in this double being of the commodity is represented the twofold character of the la bor whose product it is : useful la bor, i.e. , the concrete modes of the labors which create use values, and abstract la bor, la bor as expenditure of labor power , irrespective of whatever 'useful' way it is expended . . . that in the development of the value form of the commodity, in the last instance of its money form and hence of money, the value of a commodity is represented in the use value of the other , i . e. , in the natural form of the other commodity ; that surplus value itself is derived from a 'specific' use value of la bor power exclusively pertaining to the latter, etc . , etc . , that thus for me use value plays a far more important part than it has in economics hitherto, however, that it is only ever taken into account where this springs from the analysis of a given economic constellations , not from arguing backwards and forwards about the concepts or words 'use value' and 'value' " (emphasis added) . 4 In this passage it is clear that the use value of labor, losing its "naturalness, " takes on a correspondingly greater "specific" value in the structural functioning of exchange value. In maintaining a kind of dialectical equilibrium between concrete, qualitative labor and abstract, quantitative labor, Marx gives logical priority to exchange value (the given economic formation) . But in so doing, he retains something of the apparent movement of political economy: the concrete positivity of use value, a kind of concrete antecedent within the structure of political economy. He does not radicalize the schema to the point of reversing 4 . "Notes on Wagner," in Theoretical Practice 5 (Spring, 1 972), pp. 5 1 - 5 2 . THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 25 this appearance and revealing use value as produced by the play of exchange value. We have shown this regarding the products of consumption ; it is the same for labor power . The definition of products as useful and as responding to needs is the most accomplished, most internalized expression of abstract economic exchange : it is its subjective closure. The definition of labor power as the source of "concrete" social wealth is the complete expression of the abstract manipulation of labor power : the truth of capital culminates in this "evidence" of man as producer of value . Such is the twist by which exchange value retrospectively originates and logically terminates in use value. In other words , the signified "use value" here is still a code effect, the final precipitate of the law of value. Hence it is not enough to analyze the operation of the quantitative abstraction of exchange value starting from use value , but it is also necessary to bring out the condition of the possibility of this operation : the production of the concept of the use value of labor power itself, of a specific rationality of productive man . Without this generic definition there is no political economy. In the last instance, this is the basis of political economy. This generic definition must be shattered in unmasking the "dialectic" of quantity and quality, behind which hides the definitive structural ins titution of the field of value . The Concrete Aspect of La bor: The "Dialectic " of Quality and Quantity "The quantitative aspect of labor could not emerge until it was universalized during the 1 8th century in Europe . . . Until then, the different forms of activity were not fully comparable . . . labor 26 CHAPTER ! appeared then as diverse qualities . " 5 During the historical epoch of the artisanal mode of production, qualitative labor was differentiated in relation to its process, to its product, and to the des tination of the product . In the subsequent capitalist mode of production labor is analyzed under a double form : "While labor which creates exchange values is abstract, universal and homogeneous, labor which produces use values is concrete and special and is made up of an endless variety of kinds of labor according to the way in which and the material to which it is applied. " 6 Here we rediscover the moment of use value : concrete, differentiated, and incommensurable. In contrast to the quantitative measure of labor power, labor use value, remains nothing more or less than a qualitative potentiality. It is specified by its own end, by the material it works on, or simply because it is the expenditure of energy by a given subject at a given time . The use value of labor power is the moment of its actualization, of man's relation to his useful expenditure of effort. Basically it is an act of (productive) consumption; and in the general process , this moment retains all its umqueness. At this level labor power 1s incommensurable. There is , moreover, a profound enigma through out the articulation of M arx's theory : how is surplus value born? How can labor power, by definition qualitative, generate a measurable actualization? One would have to assume that the "dialectical" opposition of quantity and quality expresses only an 5 . Pierre Naville, Le nouveau leviathan (Paris : Riviare, 1954), p. 3 7 1 . 6 . Marx, Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (New York: International Publishers, 1 904), p. 3 3 . THE CONCEPT 0 F LABOR 27 apparent movement . In fact, the effect of quality and of incommensur ability once again partakes of the apparent movement of political economy. What produces the univers alization of labor in the eighteenth century and consequently reproduces it is not the reduction of concrete, qualitative labor by abstract, quantita tive labor but, from the outs et, the structural articu lation of the two terms . Work is really universalized at the base of this "fork, " not only as market value but as human value . Ideology always thus proceeds by a binary, structural s cission , which works here to universalize the dimension of labor. By dividing (or redividing into the qualitative struc tural effect , a code effect) , quantitative labor spreads throughout the field of possibility. Henceforth there can be only labor - qualitative or quantitative. The quantitative still signifies only the commensurability of all forms of labor in abstract value ; the qualitative, under the pretext of incommensurability, goes much further. It sinigifes the compara bility of all human practice in terms of production and la bor. Or better : the abstract and formal univers ality of the commodity labor power is what supports the "concrete" universality of qualitative labor . But this "concrete" is a n abuse o f the word. It seems opposed to the abstract at the base of the fork, but in fact the fork itself is what establishes the abstraction. The autonomization of labor is sealed in the play of the two - from the abstract to the concrete, from the qualitative to the quantitative, from the exchange value to the use value of labor . In this structuralized play of signifiers , the fetishism of labor and productivity crystallizes. 7 7 . There i s a further great disjuncture through which the 28 CHAPTER 1 And what is this concrete aspect of labor? Marx says : "The indifference as to the particular kind of labor implies the existence of a highly developed aggregate of different species of concrete labor, none of which is any longer the predominant one . So do the most general abstractions commonly arise only where there is the highest concrete development, where one feature appears to be jointly possessed by many, and to be common to all."8 But if one type of labor no longer dominates all others, it is because labor itself dominates all other realms . Labor is substituted for all other forms of wealth and exchange . Indifference to determined labor corre sponds to a much more total determination of social wealth by labor. And what is the conception of this social wealth placed entirely under the sign of labor , if not use value? The "richest concrete development" is the qualitative and quantitative multiplication of use values. "The greater the extent to which historic needs - needs created by production itself, social needs - needs which are thems elves the offspring of social production and intercourse, are posited as necessary, the higher the level to which real wealth has become developed. Regarded materially, wealth cons ists only in the manifold variety of needs. " Is critique of political economy is articulated: the split between the technical and the social division of labor, which is subject to the same analysis. Transfiguring the technical division as both sides of the social division, it thus preserves the fiction of an ideal dis tribution of labor, of a concrete "non-alienated" productivity; and it universalizes the technical mode or technical reason. Thus the dialectic of productive forces-relations of production : every· where the "dialectical" contradiction ends up as a Moebius band. But meanwhile this contradiction has circumscribed and universalized the field of production. 8 . Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, op. cit., pp. 298-299. 9. Grundrisse, trans. M. Nicolaus (London: Pelican, 1 973), THE CONCEPT O F LABOR 29 this not the program of advanced capitalist society? Failing to conceive of a mode of social wealth other than that founded on labor and production, Marxi m no longer furnishes in the long run a real alternative to capitalism . Assuming the generic schema of production and needs involves an incredible simplification of social exchange by the law of value. Viewed correctly, this fantastic proposition is both arbitrary and strange with respect to man's status in society. The analysis of all primitive or archaic organizations contradicts it, as does the feudal symbolic order and even that of our societies , since all pers pectives opened up by the contradictions of the mode of production drive us hopelessly into political economy. The dialectic of production only intens ifies the abstractness and separation of political economy. This leads us to the radical questioning of Marxist theoretical dis course . When in the last instance Marx defines the dialectical relation of abstract concrete as the relation between "scientific representation and real movement" (what Althusser will analyze precisely as the production of a theoreti cal object) , this theoretical production, itself taken in the abstraction of the representation, apparently only redoubles its object (in this case, the logic and movement of political economy). Between the theory and the object - and this is valid not only for Marxism - there is, in effect , a dialectical relation, in the bad sense : they are l ocked into a speculative dead end .10 It becomes impossible to think outside the form production or the form representation . p . 527 . 10. We will return to this reciprocal neutralization of the theory and the object when we deal with the relations between Marxist theory and the workers' movement. 30 CHAPTER 1 Man's Double "Generic " Face. In fact the use value of labor power does not exist any more than the use value of products or the autonomy of signified and referent. The same fiction reigns in the three orders of production , consump tion, and signification. Exchange value is what makes the use value of products appear as its anthropological horizon. The exchange value of labor power is what makes its use value, the concrete origin and end of the act of labor , appear as its "generic" alibi . This is the logic of signifiers which produces the "evidence" of the "reality" of the signified and the referent . In every way, exchange value makes concrete production, concrete con sumption, and concrete signification appear only in distorted, abstract forms. But it foments the concrete as its ideological ectoplasm , its phantasm of origin and transcendence [depassement]. In this sense need, use value, and the referent "do not exist . " l l They are only concepts produced and projected into a generic dimension by the develop ment of the very system of exchange value. By the same token, the double potentiality of man as needs and labor power, this double "generic" face of univers al man , is only man as produced by the system of political economy . And productivity is not primarily a generic dimension, a human and social kernel of all wealth to be extracted from the husk of capitalist relations of production (the eternal empiricist illusion) . Instead, all this must be overturned to see that the abstract and generalized dev lopment of productivity (the developed form of political economy) is what makes the concept of 1 1 . This does not mean that they have never existed. Hence we have another paradox that we must return to later. THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 31 product£on itself appear as man's movement and generic end (or better, as the concept of man as producer) . In other words, the system of political economy does not produce only the individual as labor power that is sold and exchanged : it produces the very conception of labor power as the fundamental human potential. M ore deeply than in the fiction of the individual freely selling his labor power in the market, the system is rooted in the identification of the individual with his labor power and with his act of "transforming nature according to human ends . " I n a work , man is not only quantitatively exploited as a productive force by the system of capitalist political economy, but is also metaphysically overdetermined as a producer by the code of political economy. l2 In the last instance, the system rationalizes its power here. A nd £n thzs Marx£sm asszsts the cunn£ng of cap£tal. It conv£nces men that they are alz"enated by the sale of the£r la bor power, thus censor£ng the much more rad£cal hypotheszs that they m£ght be alz"enated as la bor power, as the "£nalz"ena ble " power of creat£ng value by the£r la bor. If on the one hand Marx is interes ted in the later fate of the labor power objectified in the production process as abstract social labor (labor as its exchange value) , Marxist theory, on the other hand, never challenges human capacity of production (energetic, physical, and intellectual) , this productive potential of every man in every society "of transforming his environment into ends useful for the individual or the society , " this A rbez"tsvermogen . Criticism and 1 2 . Similarly for nature : there is not only the exploitation of nature as a productiv  force, but overdetermination of nature as referen t, as "objective" reality, by the code of political economy. 32 CHAPTER 1 history are strangely arrested before this anthropolo gical postulate : a curious fate for a Marxist concept. The same fate has befallen the concept of need in its present operation (the consumption of use value) . It presents the same characteris tics as the concrete as pect of labor : uniqueness, differentiation, and incommensurability - in short, "quality . " If the one can be defined as "a specific type of action that produces its own product, " the other is also defined as "a specific kind of tendency (or other psycho logistic motivation, s ince all of this is only bad psychology) seeking its own s atisfaction . " Need also "decomposes both matter and form . . . into infinitely varied types of consumption. " In concrete labor man gives a useful, objective end to nature; in need he gives a useful, subjective end to products . Needs and labor are man's double potentiality or double generic quality. This is the s ame anthropological realm in which the concept of production is sketched as the "fundamental movement of human exist ence, " as defining a rationality and a sociality appropriate for man. Moreover, the two are logically united in a kind of ultimate p'erspective : "In a higher stage of community s ociety . . . work will not be simply a means of living but will become the prime , vital need itself. " 13 Radical in its logical analys is of capital , Marxist theory nonetheless maintains an anthropological cons ensus with the options of Western rationalism in its definitive form acquired in eighteenth century bourgeois thought . Science , technique, progress, history - in these ideas we have an entire civilization that comprehends itself as producing its own 1 3 . 1 844 Manuscrzpts. [I have not been able to locate this quotation. Translator's note] THE CONCEPT O F LABO R 3 3 development and takes its dialectical force toward completing humanity in terms of totality and hap· piness . Nor did Marx invent the concepts of genesis, development, and finality. He changed nothing basic : nothing regarding the idea of man producing himself in his infinite determination, and contin ually surpassing himself toward his own end . Marx translated this concept into the logic of material production and the historical dialectic of modes of production. But differentiating modes of production renders unchallengeable the evidence of production as the determinant ins tance . It general izes the economic mode of rationality over the entire expanse of human history, as the generic mode of human becoming. It circumscribes the entire history of man in a gigantic simulation model. It tries some how t o turn against the order o f capital b y using as a n analytic instrument the most subtle ideological phantasm that capital has itself elaborated. Is this a "dialectical" reversal? Isn't the system pursuing z"ts dialectic of universal reproduction here? If one hypothesizes that there has never been and wzU never be an ything but the single mode of production ruled , by capitalzst political economy - a concept that makes sense only in relation to the economic formation that produced it (indeed, to the theory that analyzes this economic formation) - then even the "dialectical" generalization of this concept is merely the ideological universalization of this system's postulates . Ethic of Labor; Esthetic of Play This logic of material production, this dialectic of modes of production, always returns beyond history to a generic definition of man as a dialectical being ; a notion intelligible only through the process of the 34 CHAPTER 1 objectification of nature. This position is heavy with consequences to the extent that, even through the vicissitudes of his history, man (whose history is also his "product") will be ruled by this clear and defini tive reason , this dialectical scheme that acts as an implicit philosophy. Marx develops it in the 1844 Manuscrzpts ; Marcuse revives it in his critique of the economic concept of labor : " . . . labor is an onto logical concept of human existence as such . " He cites Lorenz von Stein : "Labor is . . . in every way the actualization of one's infinite determinations through the self-positing of the individual person ality [in which the personality itself] makes the content of the external world its own and in this way forces the world to become a part of its own internal world . " 14 Marx : "Labor is man's coming-to - be for himse lf within externalization or as externalized man . . . [ that is] , the self-creation and self-objecti fication [of man]. " 15 And even in Capital: "So far therefore as labor is a creator of use-value, is useful labor, it is a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, for the existence of the human race ; it is an external nature-imposed necessity, without which there can be no material exchanges between man and nature, and therefore no life. "16 "Labor is, i n the first place, a process in which both man and nature participate, and in which man of his own accord starts , regulates, and controls the material re-actions between himself and nature . He 1 4 . "On the Concept of Labor , " Telos 16 (Summer, 1973 ) , pp. 1 1 - 1 2 . 1 5 . Easton and Guddat, eds. , Writings of the Young Marx on Phzwsophy and Society (New York : Anchor, 1 969), pp. 3 22 and 3 3 2 . 1 6. Capital (Moscow : Foreign Languages Publishing House) , Vol. I, pp. 42-43 . THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 35 opposes himself to nature as one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs , head and hands , the natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate nature's productions in a form adapted to his own wants. " 17 The dialectical culmination of all of this is the concept of nature as "the inorganic body of man : " the naturalization of man and the hum ani zation of nature . 18 On this dialectical base, Marxist philosophy unfolds in two directions : an ethic of labor and an esthetic of non-labor. The former traverses all bourgeois and socialist ideology. It exalts labor as value , as end in itself, as categorical imperative . Labor loses its negativity and is raised to an absolute value. But is the "materialist" thesis of man's generic productivity very far from this "idealist" sanctifi cation of labor? I n any case , it is dangerously vulnerable to this charge . I n the same article, Marcuse says : " . . . insofar as they take the concept of 'needs' and its satisfaction in the world of goods as the starting point, all economic theories fail to recognize the full factual content of labor . . . . The essential factual content of la bar is not grounded i n the scarcity o f goods, nor in a discontinuity between the world of disposable and utilizable goods and human needs, but , on the contrary, in an essential excess of human existence beyond every possible situation in which it finds itself and the world. " 19 O n this basis he separates off play a s a secondary activity : "In the structural sense , within the totality of human existence, labor IS necessarily and 1 7 . 1 8 . played 1 9. Ibid . , p. 1 7 7 . Engels, always a naturalist, goes so far a s t o exalt the role by work in the transition from ape to man. Marcuse, op. cit., p . 22. 36 CHAPTER 1 eternally 'earlier' than play : it is the starting point, foundation, and prinCiple of play insofar as play is precisely a breaking off fro m labor and a recuperationfor labor . "20 Thus, labor alone founds the world as objective and man as historical . In short, labor alone founds a real dialectic of trans cendence [ depassement] and fulfillment . Even metaphysically, it justifies the painful character of labor . " I n the last analysis , the burdensome character of labor expresses nothing other than a negativity rooted in the very essence of human existence : man can achieve his own self only by passing through otherness : by passing through 'externalization' and 'alienation' . " 21 I cite this long passage only to show how the Marxist dialectic can lead to the purest Christian ethic . (Or its opposite. Today there is a widespread contamination of the two positions on the basis of this transcendence of alienation and this intra-worldly asceticism of effort and overcoming where Weber located the radical germ of the capitalist spirit . ) I have cited it also because this aberrant sanctification of work has been the secret vice of Marxist political and economic strategy from the beginning. It was violently attacked by Benjamin : " Nothing was more corrupting for the German workers' movement than the feeling of swimming with the current . It mistook technical development for the current, the direction it believed it was swimming in . From there , there was only one step to take in order to imagine that industrial labor represented a political performance. With German workers the o l d Protestant ethic of work celebrated, in a secular form , its resurrection. 20. Ibid., p. 1 5 . 2 1 . Ibid., p. 2 5 . THE CONCEPT O F LABOR 3 7 The Gotha Program bore traces of this confusion . It defined work as ' the source of all wealth and culture . ' To which Marx , even worse, objected that man possesses only his labor power, etc . However, the confusion spread more and more : and Joseph Dietzgen announced, 'Work is the Messiah of the modern worl d . In the amelioration of labor resides the wealth that can now bring what no redeemer has succeeded in' . " 22 Is this "vulgar" Marxism , as Benjamin believes? It is no less "vulgar" than the "strange delusion" L afargue denounced in The Right to Be Lazy: "A strange delusion possesses the working classes of the nations where capitalist civili zation holds its sway. " 23 Apparently, "pure and uncompromlSlng" Marxism itself preaches the liberation of productive forces under the auspices of the negativit y of l abor . But, confronted by the "vulgar" idealism of the gospel of work, isn't this an "aristocratic" idealism? The former is positivist and the la tter calls itself "dialectical . " But they share the hypothesis of man's productive vocation . If we admit that it raises anew the purest metaphysics , 24 then the only difference between "vulgar" Marxism and the "other" Marxism would be that between a religion of the masses and a philosophical theory - not a great deal of difference. Confronted by the a bsolute idealism of labor, dialectical materialism is perhaps only a dialectical idealism of productive forces. We will return to this 22. Walter Benjamin, Poesie et revolution ( Paris : Denoel, 197 1 ) . p. 283 . 2 3 . Paul Lafargue, The Right t o B e Lazy, trans. C . Kerr (Chicago : Kerr, 1 9 1 7) , p. 9. 24 . Such a s conceiving man a s the union o f a soul and a body -- which gave rise to an extraordinary "dialectical" efflorescence in the Christian Middle Ages. 38 CHAPTER l to see if the dialectic of means and end at the heart of the principle of the transformation of nature does not already virtually imply the autonomization of means (the autonomization of science, technology, and labor ; the autonomization of production as generic activity ; the autonomization of the dialectic itself as the general scheme of development) . 25 The regressive character of this work ethic is evidently related to what it represses : Marx's chief discovery regarding the double nature of labor (his discovery of abstract and measurable social lab or) . In the fine points of Marxist thought, confronting the work ethic is an esthetic of non-work or play itself based on the dialectic of quantity and quality. Beyond the capitalist mode of production and the quantitative measure of labor, this is the perspective of a definitive qualitative mutation in communist society : the end of alienated Ia bor and the free objectification of man's own powers . "In fac t , the realm of freedom actually begins only where labor which is determined by necessity and mundane con siderations ceases ; thus in the very nature of things it lies beyond the sphere of actual material production. . . . Freedom in this field can only consist in socialized man, the associated producers , rationally regulating their interchange with Nature , bringing · it under their common control , instead of being ruled by it as by the blind forces of N a ture ; and achieving this with the least expenditure of energy and under conditions most favorable to , and worthy of, their human nature. But it nonetheless still remains a realm of necessity. Beyond it begins that 25. But this autonomization is the key which turns Marxism toward Social Democracy, to its present revisionism, and to tis total positivist decay (which includes bureaucratic Stalinism as well as Social Democratic liberalism). THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 3 9 development of human energy which is an end in itself, the true realm of freedom which, however, can blossom forth only with this realm of necessity as its basis . " 26 Even Marcuse , who returns to the less puritanical (less Hegelian) conceptions, which, how ever , are totally philosophical (Schiller's esthetic philosophy) , says that " Play and display, as prin ciples of civilization, imply not the transformation of labor but its complete subordination to the freely evolving potentialities of man and nature . The ideas of play and display now reveal their full distance from the values of productiveness and performance . Play is unproductive and useless precisely because it cancels the repressive and exploitative traits of labor and leisure . . . " 27 This realm beyond political economy called play, non-work, or non- alienated labor , is defined as the reign of a finality without end. In this sense it is and remains an esthetic, in the extremely Kantian sense, with all the bourgeois ideological connotations which that implies . Although Marx's thought settled accounts with bourgeois morality, it remams defenseless before its esthetic, whose ambiguity is more subtle but whose complicity with the general system of political economy is just as profound . Once again, at the heart of its strategy, in its analytic distinction between quantity and quality , Marxist thought inherits the esthetic and humanistic virus of bourgeois thought, since the concept of quality is burdened with all the finalities - whether those concrete finalities of use value , or those endless ideal and transcendent finalities. Here stands the defect of 26 . Capital, op . cit . , I I I , pp. 799-800 . 2 7. Marcuse, Eros and Civilization (New York : Vintage, 1 962), p. 1 7 8 . 40 CHAPTER I all notions of play, freedom , transparence , or dis alienation : it is the defect of the revolutionary imagination since, in the ideal types of play and the free play of human faculties, we are still in a process of repressive desublimatio n . In effect, the sphere of play is defined as the fulfillment of human rationality, the dialectical culmination of man's activity of incessant objectification of nature and control of his exchanges with it. It presupposes the full development of productive forces ; it "follows in the footsteps" of the reality principle and the trans formation of nature. Marx clearly states that it can flourish only when founded on the reign of necessity. Wishing itself beyond labor but in its continuation, the sphere o f play is always merely the esthetic sublimation of l abor's constraints . With this concept we remain rooted in the problematic of necessity and freedom , a typically bourgeois problematic whose double ideological expression has always been the institution of a reality principle (repression and sublimation, the principle of l abor) and its formal overcoming in an ideal tran scendence . j Work and non-work : here is a "revolutionary" theme. It is undoubtedly the most subtle form of the type of binary, structural opposition discussed above . The end of the end of exploitation by work is this reverse fascination with non-work, this reverse mirage of free time (forced time- free time, full time empty time : another paradigm that fixes the hegemony of a temporal order which is always merely that of production) . Non-work is still only the repressive desublimation of l abor power, the antithesis which acts as the alternative . Such is the sphere of non-work : even if it is not immediately  nflated with leisure and its present bureaucratic · THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 4 1 organization, where the desire for death and morti fication and its management by social institutions are as powerful as in the sphere of work ; even if it is viewed in a radical way which represents it as other than the mode of "total disposability" or "freedom" for the individual to "produce" himself as value, to "express himself, " to "liberate himself' as a ( con scious or unconscious) authentic content , in short, as the ideality of time and of the individual as an empty form to be filled finally by his freedom . The finality of value is always there . It is no longer inscribed in determined contents as in the sphere of productive activity ; henceforth it is a pure form, though no less determining. Exactly as the pure institutional form of painting, art , and theater shines forth in anti painting, anti - art, and anti-theater, which are emptied of their contents, the pure form of labor shines forth in non-labor. Although th  concept of non-labor c an· thus be fantasized as the abolition of political economy, it is bound to fall back into the sphere of political economy as the sign, and only the sign , of its abolition. It already escapes revolu tionaries to enter into the programmatic field of the "new society . " Marx and the Hieroglyph of Value Julia Kristeva writes in Semiotica : "From the viewpoint of social distribution and consumption (of communication) , labor is always a value of use or exchange . . . Labor is measurable according to the value which it is, and not in any other way . Value is measured by the quantity of time socially necessary for production. But Marx clearly outlined another possibility : work cou d be apprehended outside value , on the side of the commodity produced and circulating in the chain of communication. Here 42 CHAPTER 1 labor no longer represents any value , meaning, or signification. It is a question only of a body and a discharge . . . " 28 Marx writes, "The use values, coat, linen, etc . , i . e . , the bodies of commodities, are combinations of two elements - matter and labor . . . We see, then; that labor is not the only source of material wealth, of use-values produced by labor, as William Petty puts it, labor is its father and the earth its mother . . . Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form , viz . , the useful character of the l abor , is nothing but the expenditure of human labor power . " 29 Is there a conception of labor in Marx different from that of the production of useful ends (the canonical definition of labor as value in the framework of political economy and the anthropo logical definition of labor as human finality)? Kristeva attributes to Marx a radically different vision centered on the body, discharge, play, anti value, non-utility, non-finality, etc . She would have him read B ataille before he wrote - but also forget him when it is convenient . If there was one thing Marx did not think about, it was discharge, waste , sacrifice , prodigality, play, and symbolism . Marx thought about production (not a bad thing) , and he thought of it in terms of value. There is no way of getting around this . Marxist labor is defined in the absolute order of a natural necessity and its dialectical overcoming as rational activity producing value. The social wealth pro duced is material; it has nothing to do with i8. Julia Kristeva, "La semiotique et Ia production, " Semiotica 2 . [ I have not been able to complete this reference. Translator's note] 29. Capital, op. cit., I, pp. 43 -44. THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 43 symbolic wealth which, mocking natural necessity, comes conversely from destruction, the decon struction of value, transgression, or discharge . These two notions of wealth are irreconcilable , perhaps even mutually exclusive ; it is useless to attempt acrobatic transfers. According to Bataille , "sacri ficial economy or symbolic exchange is exclusive of political economy ( and of its critique, which is only its completion) . But this is just to render to political economy what belongs to it : the concept of labor is consubstantial with it and therefore cannot be switched to any other analytical field . Above all , it cannot become the object of a science that pretends to surpass political economy. "The labor of the sign , " "productive inter-textual space , " etc . , are thus ambiguous metaphors. There is a choice to be made between value and non-value . Labor is definitely within the sphere of value. This is why Marx's concept of labor (like that of production, productive force, etc . ) must be submitted to a radical critique as an ideological concept. Thus , with all its ambiguities, this is not the time to generalize it as a revolutionary concept. The quotations from Marx to which Kristeva refers do not at all carry the meaning she gives them. The genesis of wealth by the genital corn bination of labor-father and earth-mother certainly reinstates a "normal" productive reproductive scheme - one makes love to have children but not for pleasure. The metaphor is that of genital, reproductive sexuality, not of a discharge of the body in enjoyment! But this is only a trifle. The "discharge" of human power Marx speaks of is not a discharge with a pure waste, a symbolic discharge in Bataille's sense (pulsating, libidinal) : it is still an economic , productive, finalized discharge precisely because , in 44 CHAPTER l its mating with the other, it begets a productive force called the earth (or matter) . I t is a useful discharge, an investment , not a gratuitous and festive energizing of the body's powers, a game with death, or the acting out of a desire. Moreover, this "discharge of the body" does not , as in play (sexual or otherwise), have its response in other bodies , its echo in a nature that plays and discharges in exchange. It does not establish a symbolic exchange. What man gives of his body in l abor is never given or lost or rendered by nature in a reciprocal way. Labor only aims to "make" nature "yield . " This discharge is thus immediately an investment of value, a putting into value opposed to all symbolic putting into play as in the gift or the discharge. Kristeva poses the problem of redefining labor beyond value . In fact, as Goux has shown , for Marx the demarcation line of value cuts between use value and exchange value. "If we proceed further , and compare the process of producing value with the labor·process, pure and simple, we find that the latter consists of the useful l abor , the work, that produces use-values . Here we contemplate the labor as producing a particular article ; we view it under its qualitative aspect alone, with regard to its end and aim . But viewed as a value creating process, the . same labor-process presents itself under its quantitative aspect alone. Here it is a question merely of the time occupied by the laborer in doing the work ; - of the period during which the labor power is usefully expended. " 30 Hence the ab straction o f value begins only i n the second stage of exchange value. Thus use value is separated from the sphere of the production of value : or the realm 30. Ibid., I, p. 1 9 5 . THE CONCEPT O F LABOR 45 beyond value is confounded with the sphere of use value (this is Goux's interpretation, in which he extends this proposition to the use value of the sign) . As we have seen, this is a very serious idealization of the process of concrete, qualitative labor and, ultimately, a compromise with political economy to the extent that the entire theoreti<;:al investment and strategy crystallizes on this line of demarcation within the sphere of value , leaving the "external" line of closure of this sphere of political economy in the shadows. By positing use value as the realm beyond exchange value, all transcendence is locked into this single alternative within the field of value . Qualitative production is already the realm of rational , positive finality ; the transformation of nature is the occasion of its objectification as a productive force under the sign of utility (the same is true simultaneously of human labor). Even before the stage of exchange value and the equivalence through time of abstract social labor, labor and production constitute an abstraction, a reduction, and an extraordinary rationalization in relation to the richness of symbolic exchange. This "concrete" labor carries all the values of repression , subli mation, objective finality, "conformity to an end , " and rational domestication of sexuality and nature. In relation to symbolic exchange, this productive Eros represents the real rupture which Marx displaces and situates between abstract quantitative labor and concrete qualitative labor. The process of "valorization" begins with the process of the useful transformation of nature, the instauration of labor as generic finality, and the stage of use value. The real rupture is not between "abstract" l abor and "concrete" labor, but between symbolic exchange and work (production, economics) . The abstract 46 CHAPTER 1 social form of labor and exchange is only the completed form, overdetermined by capitalist political economy, of a scheme of rational valori zation and production inaugurated long before which breaks with every symbolic organization of exchange . 31 Kristeva would gladly be rid of value, but neither labor nor Marx. One must choose . Labor is defined (anthropologically and historically) as what disin vests the body and social exchange of all ambivalent and symbolic qualities, reducing them to a rational, positive, unilateral investment . The productive Eros represses all the alternative qualities of meaning and exchange in symbolic discharge toward a process of production, accumulation, and appropriation. In order to question the process which submits us to the destiny of political economy and the terrorism of value, and to rethink discharge and symbolic exchange , the concepts of production and labor developed by M arx (not to mention political economy) must be resolved and analyzed as 3 1 . For example, look at this passage from Marx on the Jsocial hieroglyph : "Value, therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later one, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own social products ; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as l!?uch a social product as language" ( Capital, op. cit ., I , p. 74). This entire analysis o f the mystery o f value remains fundamental . But rather than being valid only for the product of labor in distribution and exchange, it is valud even for the product of labor (and for labor itself) taken as a "useful object. " Utility (including labor's) is already a socially produced and determined hieroglyphic abstraction. The whole anthropology of "primitive" exchange compels us to break with the natural evidence of utility and to reconceive the social and historical genesis of use value as Marx did with exchange value. Only then will the hieroglyph be totally deciphered and the spell of value radically exorcized. THE CONCEPT OF LABO R 47 ideological concepts interconnected with the general system of value. And in order to find a realm beyond economic value (which is in fact the only revo lutionary perspective), then the mirror ofproduction in which all Western metaphysics is reflected, must be broken. Epistemology I : In the Shadow of Marxist Concepts Historical materialism , dialectics , modes of production, labor power - through these concepts Marxist theory has sought to shatter the abstract universality of the concepts of bourgeois thought (Nature and Progress, Man and Reason, formal Logic , Work, Exchange, etc . ) . Yet Marxism in turn universalizes them with a "critical" imperialism as ferocious as the other's . The proposition that a concept is not merely an interpretive hypothesis but a translation of universal movement depends upon pure metaphysics . Marxist concepts do not escape this lapse. Thus, to be logical , the concept of history must itself be regarded as historical, turn b ack upon itself, and only illuminate the context that produced it by abolishing itself. Instead, in Marxism history is transhistori cized : it redoubles on itself and thus is universalized. To be rigorous the dialectic must dialectically surpass and annul itself. By radicalizing the concepts of production and mode of production at a given moment, Marx made a break in the social mystery of exchange value . The concept thus takes all its strategic power from its irruption, by which it dispossesses political economy of its imaginary uni versality. But , from the time of Marx, it lost this advantage when taken as a principle of explication. 48 CHAPTER I It thus cancelled its "difference" by universalizing itself, regressing to the dominant form of the code (universality) and to the strategy of political eco nomy . It is not tautological that the concept of his tory is historical, that the concept of dialectic is dia lectical , and that the concept of production is itself produced (that is , it is to be judged by a kind of self analysis) . Rather , this simply indicates the explosive, mortal , present form of critical concepts . As soon as they are constituted as universal they cease to be analytical and the religion of meaning begins . They become canonical and enter the general system's mode of theoretical representation. Not accidental ly, at this moment they also take on their scientific cast ( as in the scientific canonization of concepts from Engels to Althusser) . They set themselves up as expressing an "objective reality . " They become signs : signifiers of a "real" signified . And although at the best of times these concepts have been prac ticed as concepts without taking themselves for . reality, they have nonetheless subsequently fallen into the imaginary of the sign, or the sphere of truth . They are no longer in the sphere of interpretation but enter that of repressive simulation. From this point on they only evoke themselves in an indefinite- metonymic process which goes as follows : man is historical ; history is dialectical ; the dialectic is the process of (material) production ; production is the very movement of human existence ; history is the history of modes of pro duction, etc . This scientific and universalist dis course (code) immediately becomes imperialistic. All possible societies are called on to respond. That is, consult Marxist thought to see if societies "without history" are something other than "pre"-historical, ?ther than a chrysalis or larv a . The dialectic of the THE C ONCEPT OF LABOR 49 world of production is not yet well developed , but nothing is lost by waiting- the Marxist egg is ready to hatch. Moreover, the psychoanalytic egg is in a similar condition. What we have said about the Marxist concepts holds for the unconscious, repression, Oedipal complex , etc. , as well . Yet here, it is even better : the Bororos32 are closer to primitive processes than we are . This constitutes a most astonishing theoretical aberration - and a most reactionary one. There is neither a mode of production nor production in primitive societies. There is no dialectic and no un conscious in primitive societies. These concepts analyze only our own societies, which are ruled by political economy. Hence they have only a kind of boomerang value . If psychoanalysis speaks of the unconscious in primitive societies, we should ask about what represses psychoanalysis or about the repression that has produced psychoanalysis itself. When Marxism speaks of the mode of production in primitive societies , we ask to what extent this con cept fails to account even for our own historical societies (the reason it is exported) . And where all our ideologues seek to finalize and rationalize primitive societies according to their own concepts to encode the primitives - we ask what obsession makes them see this finality, this rationality, and this code blowing up in their faces. Instead of exporting Marxism and psychoanalysis (not to mention bourgeois ideology, although at this level there is no difference) , we bring all the force and questioning of primitive societies to bear on Marxism and psycho analysis. Perhaps then we will break this fascination, 32. The Bororos are a South American society studied by Levi-Strauss in Tristes Tropiques. [Translator's note] 50 CHAPTER 1 this self-fetishization of Western thought- Perhaps we will be finished with a Marxism that has become more of a specialist in the impasses of capitalism than in the roads to revolution, finished with a psychoanalysis that has become more of a specialist in the impasses of libidinal economy than in the paths of desire . The Critique of Political Economy Is Basically Completed Comprehending itself as a form of the rationality of production su perior to that of bourgeois political economy, the weapon Marx created turns against him and turns his theory into the dialectical apothe osis of political economy. At a much higher level , his critique falters under his own objection to Feuerbach of making a radical critique of the contents of religion but in a completely religious form . Marx made a radical critique of political economy, but still in the form of politiCal economy. These are the ruses of the dialectic , undoubtedly the limit of all "critique. " The concept of critique emerged in . the West at the same time as political economy and, as the quintessence of Enlightenment rationality, is perhaps only the subtle , long- term expression of the system's expanded reproduction. The dialectic does not avoid the fate of every critique. Perhaps the inversion of the idealist dialectic into a materialist dialectic was only a metamorphosis ; perhaps the very logic of political economy , capital , and the commodity is dialectical ; and perhaps, under the guise of producing its fatal internal contradiction, Marx basically only rendered a descriptive theory. The logic of representation - of the duplication of its object - haunts all rational discursiveness . Every critical theory is haunted by this surreptitious THE CONCEPT OF LABOR 51 religion, this desire bound up with the construction of its object, this negativity subtly haunted by the very form that it negates . This is why Marx said that after Feuerbach the critique of religion was basically completed ( cf. Critiq ue of Hegel's Philosophy of Right) and that , to overcome the ambiguous limit beyond which it can no longer go (the reinversion of the religious form beneath the critique) , it is necessary to move reso lutely to a different level : precisely to the critique of political economy, which alone is radical and which can definitively resolve the problem of religion by bringing out the true contradictions . Today we are exactly at the same point with respect to Marx . For us , the critique of political economy is basically comple ted. The materialist dialectic has exhausted its content in reproducing its form . At this level, the si tuation is no longer that of a critique : it is inex tricable. And following the same revolutionary movement as Marx did , we must move to a radically different level that, beyond its critique, permits the definitive resolution of political economy. This level is that of symbolic exchange and its theory. And just as M arx thought it necessary to clear the path to the critique of political economy with a critique of the philosophy of law, the preliminary to this radical change of terrain is the critique of the metaphysic of the signifier and the code, in all its current ideo logical extent. For lack of a better term , we call this the critique of the political economy of the sign. I I I I I I I . MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE DOMINATION OF NATURE In the 1 8th century, the simultaneous emer gence of labor as the source of wealth and needs as the finality of produced wealth is captured at the zenith of Enlightenment philosophy in the appear ance of the concept of Nature, around which gravitates the entire rationality of the system of political economy . As late as the 1 7th century, Nature signified only the totality of laws founding the world's intellige bility : the guarantee of an order where men and things could exchange their meanings [ signifi cations] . In the end, this is God (Spinoza's "Deus sive natura"). Subject and world already have respective positions (as they had since the great Judea-Christian rupture, to which we will return), but not in the sense of a mastery or exploitation of Nature , or conversely as the exaltation of an original myth. The rule for the autonomous subject confronting Nature is to form his practice so as to achieve an equilibrium of significations . All this is shattered in the 1 8th century with the rise and "discovery" of Nature as a potentiality of powers (no longer a totality of laws); as a primordial source of life and reality lost and recovered, re pressed and liberated ; and as a deed projected into an atemporal past and an ideal future. This rise is 54 CHAPTER 2 only the obverse of an event : N ature's entry into the era of its technical domination . This is the definitive split between subject and Nature-object and their simultaneous submission to an operational finality . Nat!J.re. appeared truly as an essence in all its glory but u -     l_i_Slgii()f_f:h __E z  Ti'-q_f_Eroduction . This separation also involves the pri'nczple of signi' fication . Under the objective stamp of Science , Technology, and Production , Nature becomes the great Signified , the great Referent. It is ideally charged with "reality" ; it becomes the Reality, expressible by a process that is always somehow a process of l abor, at once transformation and transcrzpti'on. Its "reality" principle is this opera tional principle of an industrial structuration and a significative pattern . l From the outse t , this process rests on two sepa rated terms whose separation , however , is compli citous : confronted by Na ture "liberated" as a pro ductive powe r , the individual finds himself "liberated" as l abor power . Production subordinates Nature and the individual simultaneously as economic factors of production and as respective l . This is why each product of labor will always be both a commodity and the sign of operable Nature and of its operation. In the framework of political economy, each product, besides its use value and exchange value, signifies and verifies the opera tionality of Nature and the "naturalness" of the process of production. This is why the commodity always has a value-sign, a coded value element. (It is not a question here of connotations of meaning that are grafted on during the stage of consumption. It is at the level of production itself that the commodity signifies, that it represents the principle of production and operationali zation of Nature. ) And, in the exchange of products, it is not only economic values but the code, this fundamental code, that circulates and is reproduced. Similarly, in the institution of labor power, man becomes not only economically operational but also the effect-referential of this operationality-sign. MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY 55 terms o f the same rationality - a transparency in which production is the mirror, directing articu lation and expression in the form of a code . For a long time , even in myth, production has been thought of in the mode of human reproduction. Marx himself spoke of labor as the father and the earth as the mother of produced wealth . This is false . In productive labor man does not make children with Nature . Labor is an objec tive transformation based on carving out and technicallyabstracting the subject and the object. Their relation i s based only on the equivalence of the two terms as productive forces . What unifies them "dialectically" is the same abstract form. Thus Nature gains force as ideal reference in terms of the very reality of its exploitation . Science presents itself as a project progressing toward an objective determined in advance by Nature . Science and Technology present themselves as revealing what is inscribed in Nature : not only its secrets but their deep purpose . Here the concept of Nature appears in all its ambiguity : - I t expresses only the finality of the domination of Nature inscribed in political economy. Nature is the concept ofa dominated essence and nothing else. In this sense , it is Science and Technology that fulfill the essence of Nature by indefinitely reproducing it as separated . - However, they do this in the name of a finality supposed to be Nature itself. Hence the same concept operates in both cases : a factor of production and a model of finality ; a servile, meta phorical instance of freedom ; a detached , metaphorical instance of the totality. And it is by being sublimated and repressed that Nature becomes a metaphor of freedom and totality. Every- 56 CHAPTER 2 thing that speaks in terms of totality (and-or "alienation") under the sign of a Nature or a re covered essence speaks in terms of repression and separation . Everything that invokes Nature invokes the domination of Nature . The Moral Philosophy of the Enlightenment All the major concepts (those worthy of a capital letter) depend on the same operation. The " People, " for example, whose ideal reference emerges with the collapse of traditional community , and the urban concentration of destructured masses . Marxist analysis unmasked the myth of the People and revealed what it ideally hides : wage earners and the class struggle. On the other hand, Marxism only partially dislocated the myth of Nature and the idealist anthropology it supports . Marx indeed "denaturalized" private property, the mechanisms of competition and the market, and the processes of labor and capital ; but he failed to question the following naturalist propositions : - the useful finality of products as a function of needs ; - the useful finality of nature as a function of its transformation by labor. . The functionality of Nature structured by labor, and the corresponding functionality of the subject structured around needs, belong to the anthropolo gical sphere of use value described by Enlightenment rationality and defined for a whole civilization (which imposed it on others) by a certain kind of ab stract, linear, irreversible finality : a certain model subsequently extended to all sectors of individual and social practice. This operational finality is arbitrary in such a way , that the concept of Nature it forgets resists inte- MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY 57 gration within it. I t looks a s if forcefully rationalized Nature reemerges elsewhere in an irrational form. Without ceasing to be ideological , the concept splits into a "good" Nature that is dominated and rationalized (which acts as the ideal cultural reference) and a "bad" Nature that is hostile, menacing, catastrophic , or polluted. All bourgeois ideology divides between these two poles. The same split occurs simultaneously at the level of man, through his idealist simplification as an element of the economic system . Starting with the 1 8th century, the idea of M an divides into a naturally good man ( a projection of man sublimated as a productive force} and an instinctively evil man endowed with evil powers. The entire philosophical debate is organized around these sham alternatives, which result simply from the elevation of man to an economic abstraction. Marxism and all revolu tionary perspectives are aligned on the optimist vision . They preserve the idea of an innate human rationality, a positive potentiality that must be liberated , even in the latest Freudo-Marxist version in which the unconscious itself is reinterpreted as "natural" wealth , a hidden positivity that will burst forth in the revolutionary act. This dichotomy also occurs at the level of l abor power. When exploited, labor power is good : it is within Nature and is- normal. But, once liberated, it becomes menacing in the form of the proletariat. This contradiction is averted by assimilating the proletariat to a demonic, perverse, destructive Nature. Thus the dichotomy in the idea of Nature which expresses the profound separation in the economic order is admirably recuperated at the ideological level as a principle of moral order and social discrimination. 58 CHAPTER 2 Fetishized for better or for worse, such is the true "alienation" of Nature and of the corresponding idea of M m. When at the same time he brands Nature and himself with the seal of production, man proscribes every relation of symbolic exchange between himself and Nature . It is this proscribed ambivalence that reemerges in the ambiguity of Nature and in man's own moral contradiction . Marxism has not disencumbered itself of the moral philosophy of the Enlightenment . It has rejected its naive and sentimental side (Rousseau and Bernardin de Saint-Pierre) , its cloying and fan tastic religiosity ( from the noble savage and the Age of Gold to the sorcerer's apprentice), but it holds onto the religion : the moralizing phantasm of a Nature to be conquered. By secularizing it in the economic concept of scarcity, Marxism keeps the idea of Necessity without transforming it . The idea of "natural Necessity" is only a moral idea dictated by political economy, the ethical and philosophical version of that bad Nature systematically connected with the arbitrary postulate of the economic . In the mirror of the economic, Nature looks at us with the eyes of necessity. Marx says, "Just as the savage must wrestle with Nature to satisfy his wants, to maintain and reproduce life, so must civilized man, and he must do so in all social formations and under all possible modes of production. With his development this realm of physical necessity expands as a result of his wants : but, at the same time , the forces in production which satisfy these wants also increase. " 2 What is not recognized here - and what allies Marx with the foundations of political economy - is that in 2 . Capital, op. cit., I I I , pp. 799-800. MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY 59 his symbolic exchanges primitive man does not guage himself in relation to Nature . He is not aware of Necessity, a Law that takes effect only with the objectification of Nature . The Law takes its definitive form in capitalist political economy ; moreover, it is only the philosophical expression of Scarcity. Scarcity, which itself arises in the market economy, is not a given dimension of the economy. Rather, it is what produces and reproduces economic exchange . In that regard it is different from primitive exchange, which knows nothing of this "Law of Nature" that pretends to be the ontological dimension of man . 3 Hence it is an extremely serious problem that Marxist thought retains these key concepts which depend on the metaphysics of the market economy in general and on modern capitalist ideology in particular. Not analyzed or unmasked (but exported to primitive society where they do not apply), these concepts mortgage all further analysis. The concept of pro duction is never questioned ; it will never radically overcome the influence of political economy. Even Marxism's transcending perspective will always be burdened by counter-dependence on political economy. Against Necessity it will oppose the mastery of Nature ; against Scarcity it will oppose Abundance ( "to each according to his needs") with out ever resolving either the arbitrariness of these concepts or their idealist overdetermination by political economy. The political order is at stake here. C an the quan titative development of productive forces lead to a revolution of social relations? Revolutionary hope is 3 . Cf. Marshall Sahlins, " La premiere societe d'abondance, " Les Temps Modernes (October, 1 968). p p . 64 1 -680. 60 CHAPTER 2 based "objectively" and hopelessly on this claim . Even for Marcuse in The End of Utopia , the due date of revolution is at hand given our technological potentials : quantitative change is possible as of now. Even when the situation has clearly drifted enor mously far from revolution and the dominant social relations support the very development of productive forces in an endless spiral , this dialectical volun tarism , for which Necessity exists and must be con quered, is not shaken. Scarcity exists and must be abolished ; the Productive Forces exist and must be liberated ; the End exists and only the means need be found . All revolutionary hope is thus bound up in a Promethean myth of productive forces, but this myth is only the space time of political economy. And the desire to manipulate destiny through the development of productive forces plunges one into the space time of political economy. The wish to abolish scarcity is not furthered by restoring an inte grated productivity. The concept of Scarcity itself, the concept of Necessity, and the concept of Pro duction must be exploded because they rivet the bolt of political economy. No dialectic leads beyond poli tical economy because it is the very movement of political economy that is dialectical. Lycurgus and Castration Parallel to the concepts of Necessity, Scarcity, and Need in the (vulgar or dialectical) materialist code, the psychoanalytic concepts of Law, Prohibition, and Repression are also rooted in the objectification of Nature. Vern ant cites the story of Lycurgus . 4 Lycurgus 4 . Myt h e e t pensee chez les Crees (Paris : Maspero, 1 966), p . 205 . MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY 6 1 kills his son Dryas or, i n other versions, cuts off his foot believing he is trimming a vine . In another story, Phylacus makes his son impotent while trim ming a tree or butchering livestock. Hence the violence against nature (the rupture of exchange with and symbolic obligation toward it) is immedi ately expiated. All the myths of a vengeful , bad, castrating nature take root here. And this is no mere metaphor , as the story clearly indicates. The rupture is immediately the foundation of castration, of the Oedipus complex (in this c ase parental , since the father emasculates the son), and of Law . For only then does Nature appear as an implacable necessity, "the alienation of man's own body . " Marx adopted this L aw of Necessity along with the Promethean and Faustian vision of its perpetual transcendence, just as psychoanalysis adopted the principle of castration and repression, prohibition and law (in the Lacanian version, by inscription in the order of the Signifier) . But in no sense is it a fundamental structure . Neither Law nor Necessity exist at the level of reciprocity and symbolic exchange, where the break with nature that leads to the irreversibility of castration - and consequently to the entire becoming of history ( the operational violence of man against nature) and of the unconscious (the redemption of the symbolic debt owed for this operational · violence) - has not occurred. In this sense law, which is called the foundation of the symbolic order and of exchange, results instead from the rupture of exchange and the loss of the symbolic . This is why there is properly neither Necessity nor Scarcity nor Repression nor the Unconscious in the primitive order, whose entire symbolic strategy aims at exorcizing the apparition of Law. 5 5 . And the incest taboo? Already this all-powerful concept 62 . CHAPTER 2 Under the sign of Necessity and Law, the same fate - sublimation   awaits M arxism and psychoan analysis. We have seen how materialism's reference to "objective" Necessity led it to fantasize in its revo lutionary perspectives the reverse schemes of Free dom and Abundance (the universality of needs and capacities) which are only the sublimated counter parts of Law and Necessity. Similarly, the analytic reference to the Unconscious, product of repression and prohibition, leads to the same step (today psychoanalysis is being short-circuited on a very large scale, and this turning away cannot be called accidental) : an ideal reference to a "liberation" of the Unconscious and to its universalization by removing repression. 6 In this case as well, an ideal revolutionary sublimation of a content results from accepting an essential form given as irreducible . But this form is merely the specific abstraction of an order that has cancelled symbolic relation in favor of operational violence, symbolic exchange in favor of has lost its legitimacy. Cf. Deleuze and Guattari , Capitalisme et schizophrenie : L 'A nti- Oedzpe (Paris : Minuit , 1 972), and also d'Oritgues, L 'Oedzpe africain (Paris : Pion, 1 966), etc. 6. That is, to the universalization of a positivized libido and Eros that are "liberated" as value, by which revolutionaries rejoin all the culturalist neo-Freudians in an optimistic, moralizing vision. But the other, strictly Freudian perspective (normally connoting "pessimism") is based on the economic interpretation (the Nirvana principle and a resolution of tensions) . Although this interpretation takes the problem of death into account, it contradicts all traditional humanism (idealist or revolutionary). resting instead on a conception of man in terms of instincts. This "materialist" vision is also moral and is secretly directed by Law, an instance of sublimation and repression, and hence the finality of a resolution of these instincts either in the transgression of this Law ( the pleasure principle) or in repression (Nirvana principle). In neither case can a resolution of Law be envisioned. MARX IST ANTHROPOLOGY 63 the L aw of c astration and value - or , better, it has cancelled the actualization of the death impulse and the ambivalence in exchange in favor of a productive Eros split into a symbolic violence of the Unconscious. judaeo- Christian A nti-Physis This separation from Nature under the sign of the principle of production is fully realized by the capitalist system of political economy, but obviously it does not emerge with political economy. The separation is rooted in the great Judaeo-Christian dissociation of the soul and Nature. God created man in his image and created Nature for man's use . The soul is the spiritual hinge by which man is God's image and is radically distinguished from the rest of Nature· (and from his own body) : "Uniquely in its Western form, Christianity is the most anthropocen tric religion the world has ever known. In absolute contrast to ancient paganism and oriental religions , Christianity not only institutes a dualism of M an and Nature but also affirms that God's will is that man exploit Nature according to his own ends . " 7 Rationality begins here. It is the en  of paganism , animism and the "magical" immersion of man in nature, all of which is reinterpreted as superstition. ("Rational" M arxism makes the same error by reinterpreting it in terms of the "rudimentary" development of productive forces. ) Hence although science, technology, and material production subsequently enter into contradiction with the cultural order and the dogmas of Christianity, nonetheless their condition of possibility remains the Christian postulate of man's transcendence of 7. Science (Paris), March, 1 967 . 64 CHAPTER 2 nature . This is why a scientific movement does not emerge in Greece . Greek rationality remains based on a conformity with nature radically distinguished from the Christian rationality and "freedom" based on the separation of man and nature and on the domination of nature . This separation immediately establishes not a work ethic (of material domination and production) but an ethic of asceticism , suffering, and self-morti fication : an "other-worldly" ethic of sublimation, in Max Weber's expression . Not a productive morality but a fixed order is outlined, in which well -being is to be "earned. " And this is an individualist enterprise. The passage from the ascetic to the productive mode, from mortification to labor, and from the finality of welfare to the secularized finality of needs (with the Puritan transition at the origin of capitalism where work and rational calculation still have an ascetic, intra-worldly character and an orientation toward well-being) changes nothing in the principle of separation and sublimation, repression and operational violence. Well-being and labor are both well within the realm of ends and m ans . From ascetic practices to productive practices (and from the latter to consumer practices) there is thus desublimation ; but the desublimation is only a metamorphosis of repressive sublimation . The ethical dimension is secularized under the sign of the material domination of nature. Christianity is thus on the hinge of a: rupture of symbolic exchanges. The ideological form most appropriate to sustain the intensive rational exploitation of natureS takes form within Christian- 8 . Yet it was repeatedly intersected by contradictory, heretical currents, which in their protest were always attached to MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY 65 ity during a long transition : from the 1 3 - 1 4th century when work begins to be imposed as value, up to the 1 6th century when work is organized around its rational and continuous scheme of value - the capitalist productive enterprise and the system of political economy, that secular generalization of the Christian axiom about nature . But this revolution of the rational calculus of production which Weber noted is not the beginning ; it is prefigured in the Christian rupture. Political economy is only a kind of actualization of this break. Epistemology II : Structural Limits of the Marxist Critique The above discussion poses a serious methodologi cal question (which will arise again later in the discussion of the M arxist interpretation of earlier societies) . B asing the intelligibility of the contradic tions of political economy on the structural givens of the finished system (capital), Marxist analysis cannot "naturism" : a rehabilitation of nature, a beyond of Christianity most often expressed only by a nostalgia for the origins of Christianity. From St. Francis of Assisi with his Christ-like angelicism (all creatures praise God, e tc . ) - but St. Francis was a sort of fire fighter for the Catholic Church quenching the flames of the Cathar and pantheist heresies that threatened to engulf the whole Western world - to Spinoza with his subtle and impious pantheism (God is everywhere in Nature, thus he is nowhere) and all the Adamite sects that preached the refusal of labor and the resurrection of the body, and dreamt of abolishing the very finality of the Christian order (its principle of transcendence and sublimation) in their immediate demand for the end of the whole world and for "Paradise now ." Against all these naturalist, pantheistic, mystical, libertarian and mil lenarian heresies, the Church always defended, along with the original break with nature, a morality of effort and merit; of labor and works, which was coupled with the evolution of the order of production and connected with the political dimension of power. 66 CHAPTER 2 account for these basic coordinates of economic rationality- because the system of political economy tends to project itself retrospectively as a model and subordinates everything else to the genealogy of this model . When Marxism takes up its critique it does not question this retrospective finality. Thus in the strict sense, it analyzes only the conditions of the model's reproduction, of its production as such : of the separation that establishes it. 9 The analysis of the production of the economic as finality and as universal principle of reality, the analysis of the production of the production principle , escapes Marxism since it moves only within the structural field of production. By presupposing the axiom of the economic, the Marxist critique perhaps deciphers the functioning of the system of political economy ; but at the same time it reproduces it as a model . By pretending to illuminate earlier societies in the light of the present structure of the capitalist economy, it fails to see that, abolishing their difference, it projects onto them the spectral light of political economy. Marx affirmed that it is on the basis of a critical return to its own contradictions that (our) culture becomes capable of grasping earlier societies. Thus we must conclude - and thereby grasping the relatzvit y of Marxist analysis - that in Marx's time 9. Likewise, structural linguistics cannot account for the emergence of language as a means of communicatio n : it can only analyze its functioning, and thus its reproduction, as such. But this destination of language, which linguistics takes as an axiom, is merely an extraordinary reduction of language (and hence of the "science" that analyzes it). And what operates in this " science, " in the last instance, is the reproduction of this arbi trary model of language. S imilarly, the structural analysis of capital only leads back to its principle of logical reality (in which "science" itself participates). MARXIST ANTHROPOLOGY 67 the system o f political economy had not yet developed all its contradictions, hence that even for Marx radical critique was not yet possible nor was the real comprehension of earlier societies. Marx himself could not encroach on the system's total logic . Only at a certain stage of development and saturation of the system can critique go to its roots . In particular, the fundamental determinations of the economic (form production and form repre sentation) , the break they establish in relation to symbolic exchange , and the way a radical revolution of social relations is sketched starting from them can be read only after political economy has invaded all fields of social and individual practice , far beyond the field of material production. It is useless to question Marx about these matters. Analyzing one phase and only one phase of the general process , his critique goes only so far and c an only he extrapolated regarding the remainder. Marxism is the projection of the class struggle and the mode of production onto all previous history ; it is the. vision of a future "freedom" based on the conscious domination of nature. These are extrapolations of the economic . To the degree that it is not radical, Marxist critique is led despite itself to reproduce the roots of the system of political economy.  I I I . HISTORICAL MATERIALISM AND PRIMITIVE SOCIETIES Having analyzed the rewriting of Nature according to the code of production, it is also necessary to analyze the rewr£t£ng of H-istory through the mode of productz"on . In fact, the two projects are intertwined since the crucial point of the "materialist" decipherment is societies "without history . " Moreover, it is not a matter of rewriting but simply of writing. The schema of production does not reinterpret a nature present outside it ; the schema of the mode of production does not reinterpret a history already there. Instead, the concepts of production and mode of production themselves "produce" and "reproduce" the concepts of Nature and History as their space time. The model produces this double horizon of extent and time : Nature is only its extent and History only its trajectory. They do not need somehow to have their own names because they are only emanations of the code, referential simulations that acquire the force of reality and behind which the code legislates. These are the "laws of Nature" and the "laws of History. " A third instance recovers the other two : their apparent movement is to be read in the Dialectic , which also takes the force of law . These are the "laws of the Dialectic" that govern History (and indeed N ature, for Engels) . All these concepts 70 CHAPTER 3 are articulated under the sign of materialism in a critical perspective, according to the critical illusion . This i s n o t a perspective in the Nietzschean sense , which consists in deconstructing the imaginary uni versality of the solidest conceptual edifices (the subject, rationality, knowledge, history, dialectics) and restoring them to their relativity and symptomality, piercing the truth effect by which every system of interpretation doubles itself in the imaginary : in short, by unmasking ideology - in the present case, ideology under the materialist and dialectical sign of production. The logos and the pathos of production must be reduced according to this radical perspectivism. Structural Causality and the Primitives Economic anthropology bears witness to the impossibility of accounting for societies without history, writing, or relations of production (one wonders with horror how they could exist without them). We will use as a reference Marxist anthropological thought, specific ally Godelier's in "Sur les societes precapitalistes , " and "L' anthropo logie economique, " in L 'anthropo logie) science des societes primitives.' l With all its concepts, this thought tackles a dangerous object and risks being analyzed in return if it does not quickly master that object ( all critical analysis must aspire to this - but then what becomes of science ?). Hence the object must be approached without dogmatism . "The causality of the economy cannot be presented as the genesis of social superstructures outside the bosom [ ! ] of the economic infrastructure. "2 "It is hard to see what l. ( Paris : Denoel, 1 97 1 ). 2 . Ibid. [ I have not been able t o locate the page references HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 7 1 secret alchemy can make the economy become kinship, or for what mysterious reason the economic could be (badly) hidden under kinship . " 3 (But who forces Godelier to seek it there? Perhaps there is nothing hidden at all , and he merely enjoys hide and-seek. ) Does this doctrinal agility augur lacerating revision of concepts? Hardly. Immedi ately, one reads : "Thus, the relations of kinship function both as elements of the infrastructure and as superstructure. " 4 What could this possibly mean? The "mysterious" reason is clearly the will to preserve the distinction between the infrastructure and the superstructure ; without which historical materialism collapses. All the rest is only reformist scrupulosity. By an adjustment of the concept of mode of production, M arxist anthropology thus seeks from beginning to end to preserve materialist orthodoxy against the heresy of primitive societies. "The economist easily distinguishes the productive forces in these societies that rest on hunting, fishing, etc . The relations of production, on the contrary, do not appear separated from social , political, religious or kinship relations. " 5 Logically, if there are no longer relations of production (since they are not definable as such) , there is no longer any mode of production. And how can it be admitted that we can deal with "productive forces" before any relations of produc tion have hatched? This is hardly a Marxist position. If the productive forces are only the emanation or exercise of preexisting relations,6 there is no sense in for any of the quotes from Godelier. Translator's note] 3. Ibid. 4. Ibid. 5 . Ibid. 6. Cf. Sahlins, op. cit . 72 CHAPTER 3 implanting this concept as such . Furthermore, the concept must "produce, " come what may ; the sepa ration of productive forces and relations o f production must b e saved, relieved of keeping the relations of production on ice, if they are not still "to appear as separated. " This facile cleverness saves the "dialectical" grid which establishes the economy as the determinant instance. But the only dialectic here is that of the reproduction fo the theory through the formal simulation of its object. The theory results in a perfect sophism of recovery, undoubtedly the masterpiece of a struc turalist materialism with "scientific" pretentionsl "The fundamental task of economic anthropology is to analyze the role of the economy as determinant in the last instance, and , relative to the modes of production and the historical epochs, the dominant role of social structures which at the same time fix the non-economic functions . " 7 Dominant? Deter minant? What can this mean if not the remodeling of the infra-superstructure determinist causality into a more flexible causality allowing the retention of economic determinism? Clarifying this, moreover, Marx writes : "This much, however, is clear, that the middle ages could not live on C atholicism , nor the ancient world on politics. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood that explains why here politics, and there Catholicism , played the chief part . " 8 Finally ( argues Godelier ), no society can exist without economics ; hence , economics is the determinant instance (if so , then many things can take the role of determinant instance : for example, language). In any c ase, here is the extreme 7. Godelier, o p. cit. 8. Capital, op. cit., I , p . 82n.. HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 73 limit of the theoretical adjustment by which Godelier risks showing how nothing essential has changed : "Under certain conditions, kinship is economy , and religion can function directly as a relation of production. " 9 This is as much as saying that he cannot imagine the primacy of anything except through the primacy of the economy. And certainly this is linked to the primacy of history : "As soon as humanity exists [ ! ] , the functions of economics, kinship, and ideology exist with a determined content and form . This content and this form are transformed with history and by it . . . In sum , anthropology and history turn up as two complementary fragments of the single science of history. " 10 Godelier exhibits a theoretical mania for fragmenting the object into functions in order then to dialecticize them "historically" - in fact, to structuralize them under the hegemony of one of them - and to reconcile the whole under the sign of science! All this is false. It is the paranoid idealist projection of a rationalizing machine where all concepts are mutually engendered according to an apparent dialectical movement (production, econo my, science, history) but in fact finalized by a science which sees only separation and which, to be fulfilled, projects an imaginary anthropology of separated functions. Productivism , scientism , and historicism all fashion for anthropology an object in their own image, dislocated so that it responds to their own theoretical manipulation. In this regard Godelier innocently affirms that "For reasons internal to his scientific practice, the anthropologist must question the ideology that 9. Godelier, o p. cit. 1 0 . Ibid. 74 CHAPTER 3 beleaguers the interior of his scientific practice. " 1 1 But what i f this "scientific" practice b y itself was already this ideology? In that case there is no need for interrogation. But the specificity of the anthropological object is precisely the impossibility of defining the economic and the mode of production as a separated instance . The very least requirement would thus be to reexamine the whole matter starting from this non-separation. This is impossible for a "science" that can only "dialectical ly" (to the hierarchical advantage of one instance) synthesize its object, having carefully dismantled it. No ideology is more profound than this one so profound that it eludes Marxist-scientific good will . The Copernican revolution has not yet occurred in anthropology ; and in its geocentric or egocentric discourse bourgeois and Marxist Western thought continues to describe the apparent movement of primitive exchanges. Surplus and A nti-Production Everywhere Godelier's position is full of abrupt postulations and ambiguous extrapolations . For example, "One c an say in general that in a primitive society the producers control their means of production and their own labor ; that production is oriented more toward the satisfaction of needs than toward the search for a profit ; that exchange, when it exists, operates according to culturally determined principles of equivalence between goods and services which circulate among the partners of the exchange . " 12 There are no producers ; there are no "means of production" and no objective labor, l l . Ibid. 1 2 . Ibid. HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 75 controlled or not . There are no needs and no satisfactions that orient them : this is the old illusion of subsistence economy! And exchange does not operate according to principles of equivalence, even "culturally determined" ones . The exchange-gift, to be exact, operates not according to the evaluation or equivalence of exchanged goods but according to the antagonistic reciprocity of persons . All this is more or less fraudulently exported from our political economy. Even if the intention is to nuance the structure and modalities of primitive "economy , " the result is to inscribe it in the same discourse as ours : with the same code . It means looking at primtive society from the wrong end . Consider the production of a surplus . There is ever-renewed amazement at the fact that primtives do not produce a surplus "whereas they could produce one"! It is impossible to think this non-growth, this non-productive desire . The West, as is logical with regard to its own assumptions , always thinks of it as an anomaly, a refusal to produce. If the primitives "produce, " it IS incomprehensible that they do not produce more (production implies the expanding reproduction of productive forces ; the truth of production is productivity, a quantitative growth function) . The solution must be that they produce "only for their needs. " But this is to fall from Charybdis to Scylla , since needs themselves are an undefined function and it is completely arbitrary to arrest them at the threshold of a basic minimum of survival, which has no strict economic justification and derives di rectly from . moral philosophy : from a distinct opposition we have reinvented starting from a moral conception of the superfluous and the artificial (and from the functionalist vision of the instinct for self- 76 CHAPTER 3 preservation) . The savages are "nature. " When they have "enough, " they stop "producing. " This formula contains both perplexed admiration and racist commiseration . Moreover, it is false. The savages fritter away their resources in feasts and risk living "beneath the basic minimum . " And although he shows very well how in their festive exchanges the Siane pour b ack the extra that comes from contact with white civilization, Godelier persists in affirming that "in nearly every c ase, primitive societies produce a surplus but they do not . " l3 Or better yet : "this surplus remains in a potential state" J l4 " It seems that they have no reason to produce it. " In fact, this concept makes no sense for them . How could reasons to produce a surplus occur to them? Only the anthropologist has good reasons to produce it so that he can discreetly impute it to the savages and then dejectedly verify their bewildering indifference in this regard. Subsistence plus surplus : only the presupposition of production permits this quantitative reduction to additional functions neither of which makes sense in primitive exchange. Subsistence, basic minimum , needs - these are only some of the magical concepts to which the anthropologist has recourse in resolving the impossible economic equation of primitive societies. Other variables help correct the infrastructural equation : the "social , " the "cultural, " the "histo rical" (the same desperate patching-up as in our modernist neo-economics) . "The simple correla tion, at other times assumed , between the existence 1 3 . Ibid. 1 4 . Marx says : "By thus acting i n the external world and changing it, he at the same time changes his own nature. He developg his slumbering powers and compels them to act in obedience to his sway" ( Capital, op. cit., I, p. 1 77). HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 77 of a surplus, leisure time, invention of culture [ ! ] , and the progress of civilization, today no longer appears to be based on the facts and demands a reinterpretation of the conditions of the evolution of social life and history. " But this "correlation" demands nothing at all, especially not to be mended and corrected by categories derived from the same discourse . This totally artificial construct simply calls for being deconstructed into its terms . The conclusion would then be reversed. The infrastruc ture is not adequate. It can be mixed with the socio-cultural - but this is equally abstract since, strictly speaking, the socio-cultural specified as such designates only what is left over from the infra structure . Godelier's mistake is wanting like B aron Miinchhausen , to get out of the vessel by pulling himself up by the hair : "The productivity of labor is measured not only in technical terms . . . it depends even more on social conditions. " 16 Hence, there is something "social" in primitive societies which prevents technology from developing and producing a surplus . 17 These acrobatics of the reduction of factors and the remixing "in the dominant" is only conceptual violence. We now know that it is even more destructive than missionaries or venereal disease . l8 1 5 . Godelier, o p. cit . 1 6 . Ibid. 1 7 . I t is useless to insist o n the political consequences of this aberration. All neo-imperialist politics is inspired by it. Hence, it is necessary to "eliminate" these social and cultural obstacles in order to pave the way for "modern'·' technological growth. 1 8 . The symbolic itself does not escape this structural recon· struction. Godelier says : " I t is because kinship functions here directly, internally, as an economic, political, and ideological relation, that it functions as the symbolic form in which the content of social life is expressed, as the general language of men 78 CHAPTER 3 Having contested the correlation between surplus and culture, Godelier quickly recaptures it for his account in a different form : "These economies do not limit themselves to the production of subsistence goods ; they produce a surplus destined for the functioning of social structures (kinship , religion, etc . ) . "19 These societies seem to be sustained according to manuals of modern economics : they obey the same rationality of choice , calculation, allocation of resources , etc . ( an imagery that is, moreover, as false for our societies as for the primitives) . Hence they subsist , and they then begin to exist "socially. " Here again is the absurd attempt to make a separate function out of the "social . " Primitive "society" does not exist as an instance apart from symbolic exchange ; and this exchange never results from an "excess" of production . It is the opposite : to the extent that these terms apply here, b etween themselves and with nature." The symbolic is thus conceived as a form expressing contents ( as language, but according to the traditional linguistic vision) . This allows Godelier to concede predominance to it (societies with "symbolic predominance" -Terray) without, however, renouncing the contents and separated functions which remain, under "symbolic" expression, the true instance of reference (the economic in particular) which is ready to emerge at the right moment "under the pressure of productive forces. " "It is not kinship that is mysteriously transformed into political relations. It is the political function present in the old relations of kinshzp that is developed on the base of new problems. " Here we have a new version as mysterious as the other but which resolves the problem by an appeal to principle. Thus conceived, the symbolic mode, a correlative to others in the array of instances, is no longer at all opposed to the economic rnode (one could say that primitive societies "produce" the symbolic as ours "produce" the economic). The symbolic is assigned a functional office and isolated as a category. It is assigned a structural position as a satellite term of the economic : in short, it is emptied of its meaning. 1 9. Godelier, op. cit. HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 79 "subsistence" and "economic exchange" are the residue of symbolic exchange, a remainder. Symbolic circulation is primordial . Things of functional use are taken from that sphere (ultimately the substraction will be null and everything will be symbolically consumed) . Nothing remains because survival is not a principle. We have made it one . For the primitives, eating, drinking, and living are first of all acts that are exchanged : if they are not exchanged , they do not occur. But the "residual" is still too arithmetic. In fact , there is a certain type o f exchange , symbolic exchange, where the relation (not the "social") is tied, and this exchange excludes any surplus : anything that cannot be exchanged or symbolically shared would break the reciprocity and institute power. Better yet, this exchange excludes all "production. " The exchanged goods are appor tioned and limited, often imported from far away according to strict rules. Why? Because, given over to individual or group production, they would risk being proliferated and thereby break the fragile mechanism of reciprocity. Godelier says that . "Everything happens as if primitive societies had instituted scarcity. " 20 But this "scarcity" is not the quantitative, restrictive scarcity of a market economy : it is neither privative nor antithetical to "abundance . " It is the condition of symbolic exchange and circulation. It is not the socio-cultural realm that limits "potential" production ; instead, exchange itself is based on non-production, eventual destruction, and a process of continuous unlimited reciprocity between persons, and inversely on a strict 20. Ibid. 80 CHAPTER 3 limitation of exchanged goods . It is the exact opposite of our economy based on unlimited production of goods and on the discontinuous ab straction of contractual exchange. In primitive exchange , production appears nowhere as an end or a means : the meaning occurs elsewhere. It is not there as (even underlying) potential . On the contrary, in its accumulative finality and its rational autonomy (production is always end and means) , it is continually negated and volatilized by reciprocal exchange which consumes itself in an endless operation. Godelier ignores all this and colors the objects of exchange with his. schema . "At first they function [note the obsession with functionality!] as commodi ties ; then, at the interior [ ?] , as objects of gift and prestige . . . The same object thus changes function, but the second of these two functions is dominant . " 2 1 (Implication : the first function is determinant!) Thus, the code of Marxist anthropo logy is saved by multi- functional superimposition! From here one can easily go on to disentangle by simple decantation our own historical stage (we have never left it) , in which political economy ( and with it its materialist critique) is finally able to recognize what is its own . "Thus one understands better why, from Antiquity to our own day, these objects are stripped more and more of their dominant trait as objects to be given, and why they become specialized in the dominant mode of commercial objects while preserving a traditional aspect. " 22 The term "stripped" indicates the profound theoretical racism of these categorizations , which intend only to produce in the course of history what these objects 2 1 . Ibid. 22. Ibid. HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 8 1 already were in the matrix o f a n archaic economy without being known as such - what historical materialism makes them into : objects of production. For all these objects and men lost in their primitive limbo , this is the baptism of production : the baptism of labor and value for nature and goods lost in the gratuity of their richness ; the baptism of the economic, of the mode of production, and of the determinant instance for all these exchanges that knew neither instance, determination, nor economic rationality. The materialist m1ssionanes have arrived. Magic and Labor The same blind determinism-in-several-instances leads to the same kind of incomprehension of magic : "For primitive man , labor is experienced and thought as the interior and indivisible unity of magic and technical knowledge. " 23 In other words, the Trobrianders "know" that it is necessary to work in their gardens , but they think that this work is not enough and that magic is indispensable in order to guarantee the harvest. M agic is basically only insurance on the productive forces of nature! "By his magical practices, man thinks he can insert himself in the natural order's chain of necessary causali ties . " 24 In nature he sees forces "that he spontane ously endows with human attributes. " He conceives of it "by analogy with society, as a network of inten tional relations" where the rituals and magical practices were designed to underhandedly influence · these forces, etc . This vulgar rewriting of magic is always dominated by the prejudice of a separated 23. Ibid. 24. Ibid. 82 CHAPTER 3 nature and man, a separated nature and society then rethought "by analogy" and by the image of a primitive (naive-mischievous , rational-irrational) who compels nature to produce by transforming it through labor or manipulating it through signs . Projected here is the worst Western psychology, our own melange of rational pragmatism and supersti tious obsession. It is hard to imagine for what "mysterious reason , " as Godelier says, control of forces could coexist with a rational operation, if not by his own magic of "the interior and indivisible unity" above . It is not true for archaic agriculture, as Vernant demonstrates in Travail et nature dans la Grece ancienne : nor, a fortiori, for the primitive hunter or farmer. Like the Greek peasant , the primitive "contributes much less to the harvest by his pains than by the periodic repetition of rites and festivals . " 25 Neither land nor effort is a "factor of production. " Effort is not "invested labor power" recovered many times over in value at the end of a production process. It is in a different form as full of ritual as the exchange-gift lost and given without economic calculation of return and compensation . And the fruits of the harvest are not its "equivalent . " As by an excess, they maintain exchange (the symbolic coherence of the group with the gods and nature) . Moreover, part of the harvest will imme diately be returned as first-fruits in the process of sacrifice and consumption in order to preserve this symbolic movement. Above all, it must never be interrupted because nothing is ever taken from nature without being returned to it . Primitive man does not chop one tree or trace one furrow without 25. Vernant, Travail et nature dans la Grece ancienne. [ I have been unable to complete this citation. Translator's note J HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 83 "appeasing the spirits" with a counter-gift or sacri fice. This taking and returning, giving and receiving, is essential . It is always an actualization of symholic exchange through gods. The final product is never aimed for. There is neither behavior aiming to produce useful values for the group through technical means, nor behavior aiming at the same end by magical means. (This is really why there is no scarcity. Scarcity only exists in our own linear perspective of the accumulation of goods . Here it suffices that the cycle of gifts and counter-gifts is not interrupted . ) And it is simply absurd to define primitive activity as abstract subjectivity (utility) or objective transformation (labor or suppletory magic) . Magic in the sense that we understand it, as a direct objective appropriation of natural forces, is a concept only negatively determined by our rational concept of labor. To articulate magic and labor in one "interior and indivisible unity" only seals their disjunction. It ultimately disqualifies primitive symbolic practices as irrational in opposition to rational labor . As in the case of objects, a simple observation of historical decantation produces the materialist stage of the "real" domination of nature. Marx says, "All mythology masters and dominates and shapes the forces of nature in and through imagination, hence it disappears as soon as man gains mastery over the forces of nature . . . : is Achilles possible side by side with powder and lead?' Or is the Iliad at all compatible with the printing press and steam press?" 26 This crushing argument masks the entire problematic of the symbolic under a functionalist, 26. Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy, op. cit., pp. 3 1 0 · 3 1 1 . 84 CHAPTER 3 finalist retrospective view of mythology ( and magic) in which it only awaits man's rational and technical domination in order to disappear . 27 Epistemology I I I : Materialism and Ethnocentrzsm We must now pose again the problem of the general epistemology of historical materialism. 1 . M arx outlined the formula for it, precisely in relation to labor, m the Grundrisse : "The conception of labor in this general form - as labor as such - is also immeasurably old. Nevertheless, when it is economically conceived in this simplicity, 'labor' is as modern a category as are the relations which create this simple abstraction . . . This example of -labor shows strikingly how even the most abstract categories, despite their validity - precisely because of their abstractness - for all epochs, are never theless, in the specific character of this abstraction, themselves likewise a product of historical relations , and possess then full validity only for and within these relations. " 28 What does it mean to say "valid for all epochs" but "fully applicable only for some"? This is the same mystery as the simultaneous subordination of infra- and superstructure, and the dialectical coexistence of a dominance and a deter mination in the last instance. If "the institution of the individual as laborer, in this nudity, is itself a historical product" (Marx) , if "labor is not a real 2 7 . Besides the fact that mylhology is here simply relegated to an illusory and provisional superstructure, it is completely un true that the "real" domination of nature makes the "imaginary" disappear, for the good reason that it generates a fundamental contradiction connected with its abstractness and its very rationality, which primitive symbolic exchange, wht'ch is more concrete in this respect, does not have. 28. Grundrisse, op. cit . , pp . 1 03 - 10 5 . HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 85 category of tribal economy, " 29 then how could the concept of labor be applicable because of "its very abstractness"? This abstraction is precisely what creates the problem. At the same time that it produces the abstract universality of labor (of l abor power), our epoch produces the universal ab straction of the concept of l abor and the retro spective illusion of the validity of this concept for all societies. Concrete, actual, limited validity is that of an analytic concept ; its abstract and unlimited validity is that of an ideological concept. This distinction concerns not only labor but the whole conceptual edifice of historical materialism : production, productive forces, mode of production, infrastructure (not to mention the dialectic and history itself) . All these concepts are in fact historical products . Beyond the field that produced them (especially if they want to be "scientific"), they are only the metalanguage of a Western culture (Marxist, to be sure) that speaks from the height of its abstraction. 2. Nevertheless, it is not a matter of a simple ex portation or extrapolation of concepts. M arx clarifies his approach in the same passage. "Bourgeois society is the most developed and the most complex historic organization of production . The categories which express its relation, the com prehension of its structure, thereby allows insights into the structure and relations of production of all the vanished social formations out of whose ruins and elements it built itself up , whose partly still un conquered remnants are carried along with it, whose mere nuances have developed explicit significance within it, etc. Human anatomy contains a key to the 29. M. Sahlins, op. cit., p. 679. 86 CHAPTER 3 anatomy of the ape. The intimations of higher development among the subordinate species, however, can be understood only after the higher development is already known. " 30 Althusser saw in this passage a theoretical revo lution in relation to navie genetic evolutionism . This is certainly so, and evolutionism is dead. But isn't this retroactive structuralism still an ideological process, now in the sense of a structural recon struction through a simulation model instead of empiricist, finalist evolutionism? First, it is not certain that the comparison with the anatomy of the ape is anything more than a metaphor. What guarantees the permanence of the same scheme of intelligibility when one goesJrom the bio- anatomical sphere to the human one of symbolism and historical societies? Nothing is less certain : this is no more certain than that the adult can comprehend the child only in terms of the adult. In any case, in the presupposition of this continuity there is a (positivist) alignment of all analytic approaches with those of the so-called exact sciences . If one does not admit this hypothesis and maintains a specificity of meaning and of the symbolic, Marxism contains a miscomprehension of a rupture far more profound than the one Althusser detects. But let us return to the central argument. Does the capitalist economy retrospectively illuminate medieval, ancient, and primitive societies? No : starting with the economic and production as the determinant instance, other types of organization are illuminated only in terms of this model and not in their specificity or even, as we have seen in the case of primitive societies, in their irreduc£bility to 30. Grundrisse, op. cit . , p. 1 0 5 . HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 87 production. The magical , the religious, and the symbolic are relegated to the margins of the economy. And even when the symbolic formations expressly aim, as in primitive exchange, to prevent the emergence with the rise of economic structures of a transcendent social power that would escape the group's control, things are arranged nonetheless so as to see a. determination by the economic in the last instance . Models never go beyond their shadows . Be it infinitely diversified and complicated, a model of political economy never permits us to go beyond political economy or to grasp what is on this side of it (or elsewhere) . 31 Marx's phrase "bourgeois society, etc . " is symptomatic . It assumes productivity in all societies, at least a kernel of it, from which the model of political economy can radiate . If this were true, political economy would be totally correct. If it is not true , this structural implantation of the mode of production can only make the specific reality of a given type of society burst into satellitized, disjointed categories (then rearticulated in terms of relative autonomy and dominance) . Science will be vindicated , but at what price? The old finalism is not dead. It has simply moved from a finality of contents (traditional evolutionism) to a structural finality of the model and the analysis itself. 3. We have a new objection to deal with : it is not the model of political economy itself that permits the illumination of earlier societies ; it is the analysis of their contradictions (which for Marx is the same 3 1 . The impossibility for historical materialism of going beyond political economy toward the past as evidenced by its incapacity to decipher primitive societies, applies as well for the future by the same logic. It appears more and more incapable of outlining a revolutionary perspective truly beyond political economy. It flouders "dialectically" in the impasses of capital, just as it flounders in the miscomprehension of the symbolic. 88 · cHAPTER 3 thing as the analysis of their structures) . ( Let us say in passing that the metaphor of the ape is worth less - certainly the ape's anatomical structure can not be illuminated starting from the "contradic tions" of human anatomy. ) In the same passage Marx says : "Although it is true, therefore , that the categories of bourgeois economics possess a truth for all other forms of society, this is to be taken only with a grain of salt . They c an contain them in a developed, or stunted, or caricatured form etc . , but always with an essential difference. The so-called historical presentation of development is founded, as a rule, on the fact that the latest form regards the previous ones as steps leading up to itself, and, since it is only rarely and only under quite specific conditions able to cnt1c1ze itself. . . it always conceives them one-sidedly. The Christian religion was able to be of assistance in reaching an objective understanding of earlier mythologies only when its own self-criticism had been accomplished to a certain degree . . . Likewise, bourgeois economics arrived at an understanding of feudal , ancient, oriental economics only after the self-criticism of bourgeois society had begun. " 32 Hence the crisis and the analysis of the crisis is what permits the compre hension of earlier societies in their difference and originality. Although this appears incontestable, it still participates in the critical and dial ctical illusion. Western culture was the first to critically reflect upon itself (beginning in the 1 8th century) . But the effect of this crisis was that it reflected on itself also as a culture in the universal, and thus all other cultures were entered in its museum as vestiges of its 3 2 . Grundrisse, op. cit., p. 1 06 . HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 89 own image . It "estheticized" them, reinterpreted them on its own model, and thus precluded the radical interrogation these "different" cultures implied for it. The limits of this culture "critique" are clear : its reflection on itself leads only to the universalization of its own principles . Its own contradictions lead it, as in the previous case, to the world-wide economic and political imperialism of all modern capitalist and socialist Western societies. The limits of the materialist interpretation of earlier societies are the same. Those who have discovered primitive and savage arts have proved their good will and have shown all the lucidity one could ask about the art's originality and complexity. Without bias, they have attempted to "relocate" these "works" into their magical and religious "context. " In the kindest yet most radical way the world has ever seen, they have placed these objects in a museum by im planting them in an esthetic category. But these objects are not art at all . And, precisely their non esthetic character could at last have been the starting point for a radz'cal perspectz've on (and not an z'nternal crz'tz'cal perspective leading only to a broadened reproduction of) Western culture. Hence in the materialist interpretation there is only a re placement of "art" by "economics, " "the esthetic virus" by "the virus of production and the mode of production. " What has been said of the one applies equally to the other. The analysis of the contradic tions of Western society has not led to the compre hension of earlier societies (or of the Third World). It has succeeded only in exporting these contradic tions to them . 33 We agree with Marx when he says 3 3 . At times not even the contradictions have been exported but very simply the solution, that is, the productivist model. But are not the contradictions part of theldefinition and functioning 90 CHAPTER g that there is a correlation between the analysis of our society's contradictions and the comprehension of earlier societies , but only if we note the part£al level at which they both remain within historical materialism. The blindness about primitive societies is necessarily linked to a weakness in the radical critique of political economy. This explains why, having failed to subvert the foundations of political economy, historical materialism results only in reactivating its model at a world-wide level (even if this model IS dialectical and charged with contradictions) . Through its most "scientific"34 uf the productivist model? g4 _ The most advanced bourgeois thought also exports its models (its viruses) under the cover of the most "objective" critical epistemology. "For if the final aim of anthropology is to contribute to a better knowledge of objectified thought and its mechanisms, it is in the last resort immaterial whether in this book the thought processes of the South American Indians take place through the medium of theirs. What matters is that the human mind , regardless of the identity of those who happen to be giving it expression, should display an increasingly intelligible structure as a result of the double reflexive forward movement of two thought processes acting one upon the other, either of which can in turn provide the spark or tinder whose conjunction will shed light on both. And should this light happen to reveal a treasure, there will be no need of an arbitrator to parcel it out, si nce, as I declared at the outset, the heritage is untransferable and cannot be split up" (Levi-Strauss, The Raw and the Cooked, trans. J. and D. Weightman [New York : Harper and Row, 1969], pp. 1 3 14). This is the extreme of liberal thought and the most beautiful way of preserving the initiative and priority of Western thought within "dialogue" and under the sign of the universality of the human mind ( as always for Enlightenment anthropology). Here is the beautiful soul! Is it possible to be more impartial in the sensitive and intellectual knowledge of the other? This harmonious vision of two thought processes renders their confrontation perfectly  aoffensive, by denying the difference of the primitives as an element of rupture with and subversion of (our) "objectified thought and its mechanisms." HISTORICAL MATERIALISM 9 1 inclinations toward earlier societies, i t "naturalizes" them under the sign of the mode of production. Here again their anthropological relegation to a museum, a process originated in bourgeois society, continues under the sign of its critique . I I I I I V . O N THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL MODE The Slave The status of the slave is analyzed by Marxist theory retrospectively, starting from the status of the salaried worker. The latter does not dispose of his labor, nor of the product of his labor ; but he does dispose of his labor power, which he can alienate ( although not his person which is his property) . For his part, the slave disposes neither of the one nor the other. Thus he is being defined as a function of the distinction between labor and labor power ( which will be developed later), as the sum of these two elements alienated to the master. And the specificity of slavery resides, by deduction, in the master's ownership of the slave's labor power. But this is only an analytic reconstruction. Because one reunites two elements consequently separated, it does not follow that their sum clarifies the earlier state. The radical difference is precisely that they were not separated and that what comes to pass from the separation is not readable through anticipation, except by an abuse of analytical power. We are faced again with a presumption of the economic through the grid labor-labor power. The symbolic relation master slave is conceived as a kind of husk whose "real" kernel will be extracted in the thread of history (in fact, in the thread of the theoretical model that will 94 CHAPTER 4 impose this principle of reality) . What is lost in this process is everything that is exchanged in the master-slave relation and everything not reducible to the alienation exploitation of a labor power. The fact that the slave is not separated from the master in the manner of the free laborer implies that the master is not separated from  he slave in the manner of the free proprietor (or employer) . Neither the one nor the other has the respective status of the individual and individual liberty neither confronts one another as such - which is the definition o f alienation. A relation of reciprocity exists between them - not in the modern and psychological sense of a hi-univocal relation of two individualized subjects , that is, in the individualism- altruism context that circumscribes our morality - but in the sense of an obligation, of a structure of exchange and obligation where the specification of the terms of exchange in autonomous subjects, where the partition ( as we know it) , does not yet exist . This is the level of the symbolic and not of autonomous subjects of exchange, nor of an object of exchange (labor power , nourishment, protection) autonomizable as a commodity . 1 Instead, there is a dual structure in which neither the abstraction of value nor the imaginary identity of subjects comes into play. The free worker finds his identity in the mirror of his labor power. His property, his "liberation" as a worker, signifies his accessiOn to privatized 1 . The same problem applies to the domestic "labor" of women in patriarchal society. There is neither juridical indivi duality nor a contract ; nor possible autonomization of labor and its product as a value beyond the personal relation and the reci procal obligation. The desire to assimilate these prestations with the exercise or the exploitation of labor power amounts to a political abstraction. ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL MODE 95 individuality, that is, to alienation. He is alienated not insofar as he sells his l abor power, but insofar as he is an owner, "disposing" of it as if it were his own goods. For finally what is it that allows me to dispose of myself if not "privation" (the right of the privatized individual who is isolated from others)? This is an exorbitant privilege , which the master never had over the slave, since it is only with slave-trading, that is, when slavery is included within a market economy, that the master "disposes" of the slave to the point of being able to alienate him like other commodities. When one analyzes this stage, it is already a market economy that one is analyzing and not the stage that is specific to slavery. In the original relation, the slave , or rather the relation master-slave, is unalienable in the sense that neither the master nor the slave are alienated from each other, nor is the slave alienated from himself as is the free worker in the private disposition of his labor power . In every sense , "liberation" is thus characterized as the process of the interiorization of the separation, of the interiorization of a subjective, abstract essence (in this case , labor power) over which the identity of the subject comes to fix itself. The stave's status is not of this kind . He is connected and the sovereignty of the master is not the transcendence of authority as we know it ; it is a personal domination that must not be confused with the scheme of master subject and of slave object (which is our form of rational and contractual exchange in which each subject is an object for the other). Domination, as distinct from alienation and exploitation, does not involve the objectification of the dominated, but an obligation that always carries an element of reciprocity. 96 CHAPTER 4 We have a tendency to reinterpret the relation of slavery (or servitude) as the maximum limit of exploitation and alienation in comparison to our economic configuration and our psychology of subject and object. We consider the passage to salaried labor as "liberation" and objective, historical progress. Yet this view participates in the illusion of Western humanist rationality, a rationality incarnated in the thread of history by the abstract, political State which, when instituted, attributes all earlier forms of domination to the irrational . But it is not true that domination is only an archaic and b arbaric form of power. The concept of power with all that it implies about the abstraction and alienation of social relations, about exploiter-exploited relations, etc . , has value , strictly speaking, only when applied to our kind of social organization . To project it indiscriminately on earlier forms of domination, explaining the differences as some historical underdevelopment, is to miscomprehend all that the earlier formations can teach us about the symbolic operation of social relations. The A rtisan The status of the artisan is defined not only by the ownership of his "labor power" (as distinct from the slave) but , as distinct from the salaried worker, by the ownership of his "instruments of production. " He controls his "means of production" and the pro cess of his "labor. " Only the distribution and commercialization of the product escape him - not wholly however, since if the process of production develops in the framework of an integrated community (the corporation), the processes of distribution and consumption always take place in ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL MODE 97 the cadre of integrated personal relations (self-sub sistence, family, tribe, village, neighborhood) . This determination is at least as important as the strict "juridical ownership of the means of production" in defining the artisanal mode . 2 At the stage of artisan exchange, there is still a collective mode to personal relations in which the circulation of products, though mediated by money, still does not have the general equivalence of commodities, just as the people who make the exchanges still do not have the status of equivalence with respect to a market . That is the basic definition of the artisan class : a mode of social relations in which not only is the process of production controlled by the producer but in which the collective process r'emains internal to the group, and in which producers and consumers are the same people, above all defined through the reciprocity of the group. This situation can be illustrated by the example of language . Language is not produced by certain people and consumed by others ; everyone is at the same time a producer and a consumer. In fact, there are neither producers nor consumers and what is established is not the general equivalence of individuals vis-a-vis language, but an immediate reciprocity of exchange through language. 3 2 . In a certain way, the moment of consumption remains of the artisan type even in the system of our political economy. The user who consumes enters into personal relationship with the product and directly recovers its "use value, " just as the process of artisan labor preserves the use value of the labor power of the artisan . But this personal exchange in consumption is restricted for us to the level of the privatized individual. This also remains the only moment that seems to avoid exchange value, hence it is invested today with a very strong psychological and social charge. 3. Language i s thus not a "means" o f communication (no more than the tool is a "means" of production for the artisan or 98 CHAPTER 4 In the primitive exchange gift , the status of goods that circulate is close to language . The goods are neither produced nor consumed as values. Their function is the continuous articulation of the exchange . The situation is not completely the same in artisanal exchange since goods there already have a finality of use and a value. But something remains of the personal quality of the exchange that does not permit distinguishing production and consumption as two separated functions . Just as one c annot speak of the relation of the blacksmitl. to his hammer, or of the relation of the peasant to the plow or his land, as a relation to "means of production , " so the relation of the artisan to his work is not one "productive force" applied to the other "forces of production. " It is clear moreover that neither the product, nor the instrument, nor the operation itself can be dissociated from the personal relationship in which they occur. All the categories above only serve to rationalize the situation. It is even false to say that in artisaml.l work the artisan is "master of his l abor" and "product of his labor. " For he is not in the situation of an autonomous individual , in a position of "control, " that is, of productive exteriority. T o define "work" as a process of concrete l abor, in opposition to industrial labor, is not enough. It is something other than la bor. just as there is no separation between the sphere of producers and the sphere of consumers, so there is no true separation between labor power and the product, between the position of the subject and of the object. The artisan lives his work as a relation the primitive) . Nor are individuals thinkable as separated terms outside the exchange of language. At this level, language is a symbolic form and it is so not, as is generally thought, in its coded signification function, nor in its structural agency. ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL M ODE 99 of symbolic exchange, abolishing the definition of himself as "laborer" and the object as "product of his labor . " Something in the material that he works is a continuous response to that which he does, escaping all productive finality (which purely and simply transforms materials into use value or exchange value) . There is something that · eludes the law of value and bears witness to a kind of reciprocal prodigality. In his work, what he bestows is lost and given and rendered, expended and resolved and abolished, but not "invested . " All of this is clarified further through the problem of the work of art ab.out which historical materialism, fixated in the scheme of production, has only been able to comment with respect to its mode of socio-historical determination, mechanistic or structural, never being able to account for the moment of its operation and of its radical difference. But this is also true, to a lesser extent, of artisanal work (according to etymology, "demiurge"), which draws a radical difference between work and labor. Work is a process of destruction as well as of ''production, " and in this way work is symbolic . Death , loss and absence are inscribed in it through this dispossession of the subject, this loss of the subject and the object in the scansion of the exchange . Starting from the concepts of production and labor , we will never grasp what happens there in the negation of l abor, the negation of the law of value, in the destruction of value. The work of art and to a certain extent the artisanal work bear in them the inscription of the loss of the finality of the subject and the object, the radical compatibility of life and death, the play of an ambivalence that the product of labor as such does not bear since it has inscribed in it only the finality of value. 100 CHAPTER 4 The world of production, our world, has eliminated this ambivalence. To project it every where else is a theoretically fraudulent operation, but also a failure to the extent that it annihilates its object in order to avoid its radical contradiction. All materialist writing bears the stigmas of the rigidity and the silence that it imposes on its object. In relation t o the Greek city, J . - P . Vernant suggests a very important series of elements pertaining to the status of the demiurge and labor. The unity of the polis is not based on a distribution of tasks, a division of labor, a functional differentiation, but on a "philia, " a political community of citizens defined as peers. There is no human or social function of labor. "The social bond. is established beyond the craft at that level where the citizens can reciprocally love one another. "4 The term "division of labor" itself is anachronistic here. It assumes a representation of the craft in relation to production in general , a functional differentiation into abstract , rational elements which is not the case . There is a distribution of tasks as a function of needs and c apacities ; each "labor" maintains its particular destination and does not have its meaning in reference to other "labor , " but uniquely in its end, in the need of the user. The activity of labor is seen exclusively as a function of the use value of the manufactured product. It places the producer and the user in a more or less direct relationship . A personal bond of dependence, a relation of service , seems to b e established between them. "From the perspective of use value, the product is not viewed as a function of the human l abor that created it, as 4. Vernant, " Le travail et Ia pensee technique, " in Mythe et pensee chez les Crees, o p. cit. ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL M ODE 1 0 1 crystallized labor. O n the contrary, i t i s labor that is seen as a function of the product, as appropriate for the satisfaction of a given need of the user ."5 Demiurgical labor does not produce "value . " It is a response to a demand (the need of the user) and is exhausted in this response. Articulated by the demand of the other, and articulating this demand, the object does not take on the status of value (sum of accumulated labor) that could circulate beyond this relation and enter as such into other equivalences . By way of summary, the problem is one of the best use of things, not of their transformation through labor. ( Praxis, a noble activity, is always one of use , as distinct from poesis which designates fabrication. Only the former , which plays and acts, but does not produce, is noble. ) The result is that in no way does "productivity" emerge. The division of tasks is never considered as a means of organizing production in order to obtain a maximum productivity from a given quantity of l abor . Similarly, there is no "technical" autonomization of the instruments of labor. They do not have a technical status like our means of production, their techne is connected. They have neither technical thought, nor thought oriented toward indefinite progress . All these facts converge toward one point : the inadequacy of the concepts of labor, production, productive force , and relations of production in accounting for, let us say , pre-industrial organi zation (the same holds also for feudal or traditional organization) . However, an objection can be made against Vernant . Breaking with the primacy of pro- 5 . Ibid. [I have not been able to locate the page reference. Translator's note J 1 02 CHAPTER 4 duction and denouncing the tendency to impose it in a context where it does not apply, Vernant transfers the emphasis to needs and the finality of personal use . It is these elements that define wealth and it is in them that the personal relation (on which social relations are based) is centered (and not in pro duction , which is not significant). In the polis, two persons are united under the sign of use value, rather than in our economy , where the relation is put under the sign of exchange value. In effect, .this defines, for us , the service relation. 6 But it is necessary to see that the notion of service is still strongly impregnated by our categories : economic categories since it simply effects a transfer of exchange value to use value ; psychological categories since it preserves the separation of the producer and the user , putting them simply in an intersubjective relation. " Personal" exchange is, in this case, only a psycho logical dimension that comes to connote or to overdetermine properly economic exchange . (We see this today with the "personalization" of exchanges, the psychological designation of a relation as that of two equivalent economic subjects . ) And "service" is only a moralized, altruistic scheme that preserves the . respective position of the subjects while seeking to go beyond it. Symbolic reciprocity is very different from this. The symbolic must never · be confused with the psychological. The symbolic sets up a relation o f exchange i n which t h e respective positions cannot be autonomized : 6 . Moreover, it is this notion of service that is everywhere used as an excuse to revive the present system of exchange value, that is, the fiction (it can only be a fiction for us) of a personal exchange mediated only by use value. . ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL MODE 1 03 - neither the producer and his product ; - nor the producer and the user ; - nor the producer and his "concrete" essence, his labor power ; - nor the user and his "concrete" essence , his needs ; - nor the product and its "concrete" finality, its utility. All these distinctions, which are evident in psycho logy and political economy, are excluded by symbolic relations . Abstract social labor creating exchange value by the mediation of the whole system of capital is the formula of our political economy. Labor-use value creating product-use value in a direct relation of producer and user is the formula of the artisan mode according to V ernant . This is still an economic formula. In our contemporary ideology of service it functions in the first instance purely and simply as a bonus and excuse, just as use value in general serves as an excuse for exchange value. Symbolic relations call both formulas into question . To the extent that Vernant restricts the originality of the artisan form as in the second formula, he allows himself to avoid its specifically symbolic character, its irreducibly non -economic nature . The materialist rewriting of the slave or the artisan (of the slave or feudal- artisanal mode) has serious consequences to the extent that schemas of "liberation" and transcendence, which are in reality repressive schemas, develop from it. We have seen how the reinterpretation of slavery in terms of the expropriation of labor power led to considering its reappropriation by the "free" laborer as absolute progress in the human order. This relegates servi- I ,II II l 1 04 CHAPTER 4 tude to an absolute barbarism, fortunately overcome than.ks to the development of productive forces. This ideology of freedom remains the weak point of our Western rationality, including Marxism . Similarly, the conception of the artisan as "master of his labor and of his production, " as "subject of the system of labor" 7 immediately implies the utopia of a Golden Age of productive la bor. But , there is no "l abor ; " there is only the division of labor and the sale of labor power . The truth of labor is its capitalist definition. Starting from this definition, the illusion is established of labor that would be nothing but la bor, one that can be reappropriated in the totality of its process, as an artisanal alternative to the capitalist system . In fact, this alternative remains imaginary . It makes no reference at all to what is symbolic in the mode of the artisan, bu t to the artisan revised and corrected in terms of the mastery and autonomy of the producer. But such mastery is absurd since its definition encloses itself in terms of labor and use value . The individual who "controls" his labor is an idealization of this basic constraint. It is simply the slave who has become his own master, since the master-slave couple is interi orized in the same individual without ceasing to function as an alienated structure . He "disposes" of himself ; he is his own usufruct. This is self management at the level of the individual producer, but self-management as we know is nothing but the metamorphosis of productive management . In its collective form , it outlines today the Golden Age of social -productivism . The self-management of the artisan is only the Golden Age of the small , 7 . Pierre Rolle, Introduction a la sociologie d u travail (Paris : Larousse, 1 970), p. 148. ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL MODE 1 05 individual producer, the apotheosis of the "instinct of workmanship . " But this nostalgic vtew of the artisan is not the deed of a few esthetes or intellectuals. All worker demands that transcend wage demands even a little aim , in this sense , at a reappropriation of the labor process , if not of the product. Through working conditions, "job enrichment , " the questioning of assembly-line work, the control of work rates and investments, etc . , it is always a matter of becoming I · again "the subject of the labor system . " Proudhon had envisaged "the polyvalence by which the worker , accomplishing the whole cycle of production, would become once again the master of the complete process . " Whether this demand today is individual (it gets stranded in the potter or the neo- artisan), communal or collective, it is always the ideal of a reappropriation of labor and this ideal depends on sublimation. It perpetuates, under the autonomy of the laborer, the principle of the sublimation of labor. It is contemporaneous, in the shadow of the industrial system and its constraints, with the mani pulated resurrection of the body and sexuality in which each becomes again the master of his body and the free agent of his pleasure, at once interi orizing the sexual function and reinvesting the body as the instrument of the production of pleasure. Once again there is outlined a Golden Age of functional and productive Eros . In both cases, we have repressive desublimation. 8 8 . The phantasm of leisure as an autonomous activity and the phantasm of a purely technical division of labor as a social ideal of transparency obviously depend on the same schema. One can even ask oneself if the perspective that Marx outlines of a realm beyond the division of labor is nothing but a polyvalent extension of the autonomous status of the individual artisan : 106 CHAPTER 4 Does the freedom to "function" sexually constitute a revolution? Does the m astery of the process.. of production constitute a revolution? One thing is certain : autonomous or not, master of himself or not (individually or collectively) , l abor c an only inscribe in production a sublimated Eros, or in the case of the phantasm of self-management, a repressively desub limated Eros. Epistemology IV : Marxism and Miscomprehension "The idea that in all societies the relations of production, and consequently, politics, law, reli gion, etc . , presuppose that in all societies the same articulation of human activities exists, that tech nology, law, politics, and religion are always necessarily separated and separable ; it is to extra polate to the totality of history the structuration of our own society, which is inevitably meaningless outside of it. " This summarizes the critique that we have made , in the sense that it aims less at the contents of the analysis than at the form , less at any particular conclusion than at the "scientific" tendency itself. 9 The dialectical structuring of " . . . in communist society . . . society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon , rear cattle in the evening, criticize after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, shepherd, or critic" ( The German Ideology, op. cit . , p. 22). It is an ideal of freedom and of disposability, an ideal of the achievement of a subject, a humanist project that would not contradict bourgeois, liberal thought in its better moments. And who will rule "the general production?" 9 . Cardan , pseudonym for Cornelius Castoriadis, editor of Sociali.sme ou Barbarie, 1 949 - 1 96 5 . [Translator's noteJ ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL M ODE 1 07 categories which remain in a latent state, with its latent hierarchy placing the determinant instance at the heart of the process of development, as separated functions, as distinctive oppositions ruled by the code, whether traditional or M arxist , carries an incurable ethnocentrz'sm of the code . It is at this price that "materialist" analysis aspires to be a science, to be intelligible ; but this intelligibility is that of its own code. From the outset it labors in fact to reproduce it, while at the same time compressing its object, scotomizing it, arming itself against it with a whole system of defenses and miscomprehensions . It works in the imaginary like the man who, having lost his key in a dark alley, looks for it in a lighted area because, he says, that it is the only place where he could find it. Thus, historical materialism does not know how to grasp earlier societies in their symbolic articulation . It only finds in them what it could find under its own light, that is , its artificial mode of production. This miscomprehension is not a peripheral or secondary weakness. (The deepest racist avatar is to think that an error about earlier societies is politically or theoretically less serious than a misin terpretation of our own world. Just as a people that oppresses another cannot be free, so a culture that is mistaken about another must also be mistaken about itself. This is only another way of formulating Marx's equation between the level of the analysis of contradictions and the comprehension of the specificity of other societies. ) In effect , the miscom prehension, moving from societies "without history" to archaic or feudal formations , nurtures a theoretical} political and strategic mz'scompre hension of capitalz'st formations themselves. It is a shortcoming of historical materialism in accounting 108 CHAPTER 4 for the strategic configuration of modern societies which echoes in its incapacity to account for the symbolic organization of earlier formations . And it does not help to say that "it has other fish to fry . " That is, historical materialism has the critique of the capitalist economy and its relations of production as its object and primitive societies , kinship , language and the symbolic , are not its province . Historical materialism must be held responsible, by its own standards , for the carelessness and error that it per petuates in all these domains for through these miscomprehensions, to which it is an accomplice, its own object then eludes it. I t is the contradictions of this object, repressed and mystified, that become the basis for analyzing historical materialism rather than that which analyzes them . It therefore is not a matter of accidental or venal shortcomings : the repressiOn of the symbolic nourishes all the rationalist political illusions, all the dreams of pohtical voluntarism , that are born in the terrain of historical materialism . Along with Cardan one can offer the still more radical hypothesis that not only have the categories of historical materialism no meaning outside of our society, but that perhaps in a fundamental way they no longer have any meaning for us . To the extent that they function at the interior of our reality principle, which is the principle of separation (this is where its analytic - indeed , "scientific" - efficacy resides) , they blind us along the line of separation itself, along this fracture of the symbolic, along this place (or non- place : utopia) beneath (or beyond) the economy and the internal contradictions of the mode of production . Materialist logic, seeing only the contradictions that are accessible to dialectical or structural schemas , perhaps sees only the ON THE ARCHAIC AND FEUDAL M ODE 1 09 symptoms, at the interior of the system , of that rupture which founds the system itself. The political significance of this critique is that the struggle at the level of these contradictions-symptoms does not touch their basis , which is separation . This struggle is only an accomodation that launches the well known cycle of the extended reproduction of the contradictions and the system itself. The "dialec tical" revolution in the order of the mode of production is only perhaps the symptomatic discourse of the separation . Historical materialism prohibits itself from seeing this . It is incapable of thinking the process of ideology , of culture, of language , of the symbolic in general . It misses the point not only with regard to primitive societies, but it also fails to account for the radicality of the separation in our societies , and therefore the radicality of the subversion that grows there.  V . MARX ISM AND THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONO MY A Euclidean Geometry ofHistory? Historical materialism emerges in a society ruled by the capitalist mode , a stage of actualization knotted by contradiations connected to the mode of production and to the final catastrophe of the class struggle . It wishes to decipher the ultimate phase of political economy and aims at its abolition . A theo retical reason and a universal practice, a dialectic of productive forces and relations of production, a continuous logic of contradiction, a homogenous space of positivity and negativity - all of this (and the concept of history itself) is organized according to the idea that, with the mode of capitalist production, the universal process approaches its truth and its end. Earlier modes of production are never envisaged as autonomous or definitive ; it is unthinkable that history could have been arrested with them . The dialectic limits them to being no more than successive phases in a process of revolution that is also a cumulative process of production. The capitalist mode does not escape this inexorable logic, but it assumes , nonetheless, an absolute privilege to the extent that the other modes of production have only cleared the way for the fundamental contradiction between the production of social wealth and the production of social 1 1 2 CHAPTER 5 relations, and for the possibility for men finally to resolve their social existence in its real terms. In earlier formations , men blindly produced their social relations at the same time as their material wealth . The capitalist mode is the moment when they become conscious of this double and simul taneous production , when they aim to take it under rational control . No earlier society had posed this question in these terms ; hence, none could resolve it . They could not have knowledge of the end of history because they lived neither historically nor within the mode of production. This is why they were really only precursors ; their truth was already beyond them in the future concept of history, and in its content , the determination of the social relation by material production . This concept would appear onl-y in the final stages of capitalism and in its critique , illuminating in one stroke the entire earlier process . Capital is thus an end and all history is gathered in the final process of its abolition . Or better , it is the only mode of production whose critique becomes possible in its real terms ; this is why the revolution that puts an end to it is definitive . Behind all of this there lie two postulates : - A process of historical development is already there in all earlier societies (a mode of production, contradictions , a dialectic) but they do not produce a concept of it and hence do not transcend it . - The moment of becoming conscious of the process (the production of the critical concept connected to the conditions of the capitalist formation) is also the decisive stage of its revolution. All of this is perfectly Hegelian and one can raise questions about the type of necessity that makes' the fundamental contradiction connected to the deter minant instance of the economy, which is already THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY l l 3 "objectively" at work in earlier societies, become manifest at the same time as the discourse capable of founding it theoretically (historical materialism) . As if by chance , the reality of the mode of production enters the scene at the moment when someone is discovered who invents the theory of it. As if by chance , at the same moment that the class struggle enters its overt and decisive phase , it discovers the theory that takes account of it scientifically and objectively (whereas the blind and latent class struggles in earlier societies only produced ideolo gies) . This conjunction is a little too neat and irresis tibly evokes the Hegelian trajectory in which the saga of Spirit is completely illuminated retrospectively, only to culminate in the discourse of Hegel himself. This conjunction of analysis and "objective reality" ("Communism is the movement of the real itself') is only the materialist variant of our culture's pretention to the privilege of being closer than any other culture to the universal, closer to the end of history or truth. This rationalist eschatology, which takes its bearings on the irreversibility of a linear temporality of accumulation and unveiling is par excellence that of science . The phantasm of science is double : on the one hand, there is an "epistemo logical break" that relegates all other thought to a senseless prehistory of knowledge and, simul taneously, on the other hand, there is a linear accumulation of knowledge, hence of truth as a final totalization. This procedure allows our society to think itself and live itself as superior to all others . I t i s not only relatively more advanced by the fact that our society succeeds them, but a bsolutely more advanced because, as the holder of the theory of this objective finality of science or history, it reflects itself in the universal, taking itself as end and, hence 1 14 CHAPTER S retrospectively, as the principle of explication of earlier formations . The materialist theory of history cannot escape from ideology. We have arrived at the moment of objectivity, the truth of history, the revolutionary denouement . But what authorizes science in its scorn of magic or alchemy, for example, in this disjunction of a truth to come, of a destiny of objective knowledge, hidden from the infantile miscompre hension of earlier societies? And what authorizes the "science of history" to claim this disjunction of a history to come, of an objective finality that robs earlier societies of the determinations in which they live, of their magic, of their difference, of the meaning that they attribute to themselves , in order to clarify them in the infrastructural truth of the mode of production to which we alone have the key? The culmination produced by Marxist analysis, in which it illuminates the demise of all contradictions, is simply the emergence of history , that is, a process in which everything is always said to be resolved at a later date by an accumulated truth, a determinant instance, an irreversible history. Thus, history can only be, at bottom , the equivalent of the ideal point of reference that, in the classical and rational perspective of the Renaissance, allows the spatial imposition of an arbitrary, unitary structure . And historical materialism could only be the Euclidean geometry of this history. It is only in the mirror of production and history, under the double principle of indefinite a 'Cl;lmu lation (production) and dialectical corfltinuity (history) , only by the arbitrariness of the code , that our Western culture can reflect itself in the universal as the privileged moment of truth (science) or of revolution (historical materialism) . Without this THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 1 5 simulation, without this gigantic reflexivity of the concave (or convex) concept of history or production , our era loses all privileges. It would not be any closer to any term of knowledge or any social truth than any other . Here , it is not a question of an ideal vantage point on historical materialism . Rather it is a matter of knowing if historical materialism (history made dialectical by the mode of production) does not itself constitute an ideal vantage point , that is, the point of view of a reductive ideality of all social formations , including our own . This is why it is important to begin with this ethnological reduction and to strip our culture, including its materialist critique , of the absolute privilege that it gives itself by the imposition of a universal code (the strategic element of this code being the conjunction , under the sign of truth, of theory and reality, or of "critical" theory and "real" contradictions) . Returning to M arx, Althusser develops this theory of a moment of history (our own) when science exists in an immediate form of consciousness, when truth can be read in an open book of phenomena . In opposition to all prevous modes, says Althusser, the capitalist mode constitutes "the exceptional , specific present in which scientific a bstractions exist in the state of empirical realities. The historical epoch of the foundation of the science of Political Economy does seem here to be brought into relationship with experience itself (Erfahrung), i . e . , with the straight forward reading of the essence in the phenomenon . Or, if · you prefer, the sectional reading of the relationship with the essence of a particular epoch of human history in which the generalization of commodity production and hence of the category commodity appears simultaneously as the absolute 1 1 6 CHAPTER S condition of possibility and the immediate given of this direct reading from experience . "1 In the citation on the anatomy of the ape and in the analysis of Aristotle's concept of value, Marx evidences this position : "It requires a fully developed production of commodities before, fro m experience alone, the scientific truth springs up . . . "2 If it is in the epistemological break that Marxist discourse is founded as science, this break is only possible "in a society in which the commodity form has become the general form of the produce of labor . " 3 Hence (Althusser) : "If the present form of capitalist production has produced scientific truth itself in its invisible reality ( Wirklichkeit, Erscheinung, Er fahrung), in its self-consciousness, its own pheno menon is therefore its own self-criticism in act ( en acte) - then it is perfectly clear why the present's retrospection of the past is no longer ideology but true knowledge , and we c an appreciate the legiti mate epistemological primacy of the present over the past. "4 To this Marxist scie1;1tific position, one can object in two ways : 1 . One can admit · that the epistemological break which , made possible by a certain historical process and in its own turn making possible the scientific analysis of this process, marks not a "critical" rupture but a vicious circularity.. Through the generalized commodity form, historical materialism clarifies all the significations of our society as regu lated by the generalized commodity form (either by 1 . Reading Capital, trans. B . Brewster (London : New Left Books, 1972), p. 1 24. 2 . Ibid. 3. Ibid. 4. Ibid., p. 1 2 5 . THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 1 7 the mode of production, or by the dialectic of history. It does not matter by which concept this circularity is known. In all cases , "science, beginning with its break, only describes the coincidence of the state of affairs that produced it and the scientific model that it outlines. ) . Is this the dialectic? Not at all . It is the self-verification of a model that is achieved through the adequacy of the rational (itself) and the real . In fact, this break of which Marxism avails itself is equivalent, as in all "science , " to the establishment of a principle of rationality that is only the rationalization of its own process . 2. Instead of contesting historical materialism on its own explanation of itself (the pretension of being a scientific discourse founded on a certain historical development), one can agree with it . But with the addition that, strictly speaking, in Marx 's time , the commodity form had not at all attained its generalized form , and has had a long history since Marx . Thus Marx was not in a historical position to speak scientifically, to speak the truth . In that case , another break imposes itself, one that would risk making Marxism appear as a theory of a surpassed stage of commodity production, hence , as an ideology. At least, if one wanted to be scientific! In the first case one challenges completely the validity of Marxist concepts (history, dialectic , mode of production, etc . ) as an arbitrary model that verifies itself, like any self-respecting model, by its own circularity. One challenges historical material ism in its form and it falls to the level of an ideology. In the second case , one preserves the fundamental form of the Marxist critique of political economy but forces its content to break out beyond that of material production alone . In this hypothesis one 1 1 8 CHAPTER S can admit that, since Marx , there has been just such an extension of the sphere of productive forces , or better, of the sphere of political economy (in which consumption as the production of signs , needs, knowledge, sexuality, is directly integrated, or on the way toward integration, as productive forces) . In brief, so many things have erupted in the "infra structure" that the distinction infra-superstructure breaks down and today contradictions emerge at all levels . Something in the capitalist sphere has changed radically, something Marxist analysis can no longer respond to . Hence , in order to survive it must be revolutionized, something which certainly has not been done since M arx . This hypothesis is distinguished from the first by maintaining that everything can still be explained by a critique of political economy (but one that is generalized) and in the perspective of historical materialism (the instance of production) . But, extended to all domains and extracted radically from its economistic tendency. This hypothesis , which pushes M arx to the limit, may still not be tenable. It is possible that the extension of the sphere of productive forces , which amounts to a radicalization of the concept, is such that the concept itself would have to go . What would become of the key concepts of historical materialism - infra superstructure, ideology, di lectic of the relations of production , surplus value, class and class struggle when confronted by this generalized political economy? Do they maintain such a coherence among themselves and with the historical era in which they were born that they become useless, even mystifying for us? Perhaps political economy is inseparable from the theory of the determinant instance of material production , in which case the Marxist THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 1 9 critique of political economy is not extendable to a generalized theory. The Third Phase of Political Economy In The Poverty of Philosophy, Marx drew up a kind of genealogy of the system of exchange value : 1 . Only the surplus of material production is exchanged (in archaic and feudal production, for example) . V ast sectors remain outside the sphere of exchange and commodities . 2. The entire volume of "industrial" material production is alienated in the exchange (capitalist political economy) . 3. Even what is considered unalienable (divided, but not exchanged) - virtue , love, knowledge, con sciousness - also falls into the sphere of exchange value . This is the era of "general corruption, " of "universal venality , " "the time when each object, physical or moral , is brought to market as a commodity value in order to be priced at its exact value . " The schema is clear, beyond what Marx partially foresaw. Between phase 1 and phase 2 there is the birth of capital , a decisive change not only regarding the extension of the sphere of exchange, but also its repercussions at the level of social relations. Between phase 2 and phase 3, by contrast, Marx and Marxism see only a kind of extensive effect . The "infrastructural" mutation which sets the present mode of production and social relations into place, is achieved in phase 2- phase 3 represents only the "superstructural" effect in the domain of "non material" values. With Marx , and against him in some ways, we think that it is necessary to give this genealogy all of its analytical force . 120 CHAPTER S There is a decisive mutation between phase 2 and phase 3. Phase 3 is as revolutionary in relation to phase 2 as phase 2 is in relation to phase 1 . To the third power of the system of political economy corresponds a new type of social relations, a type that is different from the contradictions of phase 2, which is properly that of capital (and o f Capital) . I n Marx's projection this new phase o f political economy, which in his time had not yet fully developed , is immediately neutralized, drawn into the wake of phase 2, in terms of the market and "mercantile venality. " Even today the only " Marxist" critique of culture, of consumption, of information, of ideology, of sexuality, etc. is made in terms of "capitalist prostitution, " that is, in terms of commo dities, exploitation, profit, money and surplus value . That is, terms characteristic of phase 2 and though reaching their full value there they only serve as a metaphorical reference when transferred as a principle of analysis to phase 3. Even the Situ ationists, without doubt the only ones to attempt to extract this new radicality of political economy in their "society of the spectacle, " still refer to the "infrastructural" logic of the commodity. From this derives their fidelity to the proletariat, which is logical if, behind the organization of the spectacle, the exploitation of labor power is still determinant the spectacle being only an immense connotation of the commodity. But this is illogical if the concept of the spectacle is taken as that of the commodity , as Marx did in his time, in all its radicality as a generalized process of social abstraction in which "material" exploitation is only one particular phase . In this hypothesis, it is the form-spectacle that is determinant since one · begins with the most THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 2 1 developed structural phase. 5 This step truly overturns perspectives regarding politics, revolution, the proletariat and social classes. But this is to accept or to allow at any rate that a revolution has occurred in the capitalist world without our Marxists having wanted to comprehend it. The objection that our society is still largely dominated by the logic of commodities is irrelevant. When Marx set out to analyze capital, capitalist industrial production was still largely a minority phenomenon. When he designated political economy as the determining sphere, religion was still largely dominant. The theoretical decision is never made at the quantitative level, but at the level of a structural critique. This mutation concerns the passage from the form-commodity to the form-sign, from the abstraction of the exchange of material products under the law of general equivalence to the opera tionalization of all exchanges under the law of the code . With this passage to the political economy of the sign , it is not a matter of a simple "commercial prostitution" of all values (which is the completely romantic vision from the celebrated passage of the Communist Manifesto : c apitalism tramples on all human values - art, culture, labor, etc. - in order to make money ; the romantic critz'que of profit) . It is a matter of the passage of all values to exchange-sign value, under the hegemony of the code. That is, of a structure of control and of power much more subtle and more totalitarian than that of exploitation. Fo,r the sign is much more than a connotation of the commodity, than a semiological supplement to 5. With his concept of "reification, " Lukacs, without doubt, constituted the only critical line of theoretical development among Marx and the Situationists. 122 CHAPTER 5 exchange value. It is an operational structure that lends itself to a structural manipulation compared with which the quantitative mystery of surplus value appears inoffensive. The super-ideology of the sign and the general operationalization of the signifier everywhere sanctioned today by the new master disciplines of structural linguistics, semiology, information theory, and cybernetics - has replaced good old political economy as the theoretical basis of the system . This new ideological structure, that plays on the hieroglyphs of the code, is much more illegible than that which played on productive energy. This manipulation, that plays on the faculty of producing meaning and difference, is more radica·l than that which plays on labor power. The form -sign must not be confused with the functz"on of social differentiation by signs, which, for its part, is contemporaneous with the drama of the bourgeois class , a moneyed class nostalgic for caste values . Since the French moralists of the 1 7th century, there has been a long literature on the social psychology of distinction and prestige that is connected with the consolidation of the bourgeoisie as a class and that today is generalized to all the middle classes and the petty bourgeoisies. (This literature finds its philosophical resonance in the "dialectic" of being and appearance . ) The important question is not this one but rather that of the symbolic destruction of all social relations not so much by the ownership of the means of production but by the control of the code. Here there is a revolution of the capitalist system equal in importance to the industrial revolution. And it would be absurd to say that this logic of the sign concerns only the ruling class or the middle class THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 2 3 which is "hungry for distinction, " the proletariat being free of it thanks to the materiality of its practice . This would be like saying that the theory of the form-commodity was good for the industrial and urban classes, but that the peasants and artisans (the vast majority in Marx's day) had nothing to do with it. The form-sign applies to the whole social process and it is largely unconscious. One must not confuse it with the conscious psychology of prestige and dif ferentiation, just as one must not confuse the form commodity, the abstract and general structure of exchange value , with the conscious psychology of profit and economic cal culation (where classical political economy remains) . Against those who, fortified behind their legendary materialism , cry idealism as soon as one speaks of signs, or anything that goes beyond manu al , productive labor, against those who have a muscular and energetic vision of exploitation , we say that if .the term "materialist" has a meaning (one that is critical , not religious) it is we who are the materialists. But it does not matter . Happy are those who cast longing eyes at M arx as if he were always there to give them recognition. What we are attempting to see here is to what point Marxist logic can be rescued from the limited context of political economy in which it arose , so as to account for our contradictions. This is on the condition that it give to its theoretical curvature the flexibility that it lost long ago in favor of an instrumentalism, of a fixed linearity. We are attempting to rescue it from the limited dimensions of a Euclidean geometry of history in order to test its possibility of becoming what it perhaps is , a truly general theory. Once again, this is only an exploratory hypothesis. It postulates a dialectical continuity between the 1 24 · CHAPTER S political economy of the commodity and the political economy of the sign (hence of the critique of the one and of the other). The guarantee of this continuity, properly speaking, is not the M arxist postulate of the mode of production. The radical hypothesis no longer accepts this fundamental concept, seeing it as an arbitrary aspect of a certain model. At bottom, the question is posed as follows : - Are we always within the capitalist mode of production? If the answer is yes, we readily accept classical Marxist analysis . - Are we within a later mode, so different in its structure, in its contradictions and in its mode of revolution , that one must distinguish it radically from capitalism (while maintaining that it is always a question of a mode of production which 1s determinant as such)? - Are we , quite simply, within a mode of production at all, and have we ever been in one.'2 Concerning the present phase of political economy, Marxist thought gives us only analyses centered on monopolistic capitalism . In effect, this is the only point which imposes the necessity to theorize something that Marx merely foresaw. But the various theoreticians (Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg, etc . ) analyzed i t according t o the principle o f the least theoretical effort, keeping as close as possible to classical concepts and limiting the problem to its infrastructural and political givens (the end of competition, the control of the market, imperial ism) . But the monopolist stage signifies much more than an extension of the competitive phase of capitalism . It signifies a complete restructuring and a different logic. What happens when the system becomes monopolistic? In his account in The Poverty of THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 125 Philosophy , Marx goes b ack to a citation from Ricardo : "Commodities which are monopolized) either by an individual , or by a company, vary according to the law which Lord Lauderdale has laid down : they fall in proportion as the sellers augment their quantity, and rise in proportion to the eagerness of the buyers to purchase them ; their price has no necessary connexion with their natural value ; but the price of commodities, which are subject to competition, and whose quantity may be increased in any moderate degree , will ultimately depend, not on the •state of demand and supply, but on the increased or diminished cost of their production. " 6 (Thus, of labor time . ) Thus, when the system becomes monopolistic, lab or time and production costs cease to be the decisive criteria ( and become surplus value?) . But one does not go as far with the law of supply and demand, defined by literal thought as a natural equilibrium of the two terms. Their correlation is not free, no more than the market itself. It is the control of demand (Galbraith) that becomes the strategic articulation. Whereas the competitive system still acted at a contradictory and perilous level in the exploitation of labor power, the monopolistic system transfers its strategy to a level where the dialectic no longer operates. In the monopolistic system , there is no longer any dialectic of supply and demand ; this dialectic is short circuited by a calculation of foreseeable equili brium . The monopolistic system (the techno structure according to Galbraith) is supported throughout by a myth of competition, 7 the 6. The Poverty of Philosophy (New York : International Publishers, 1 936 ), p. 42 . 7 . From this comes the artificial oligopoly on which the real 1 26 CHAPTER 5 hegemony of production is supported throughout by a fiction of a dialectic of supply and demand. But there is more to it than this. In the planned cycle of consumer demand, the new strategic forces, the new structural elements - needs, knowledge, culture, information, sexuality - have all their. explosive force defused. In opposition to the competitive system , the monopolistic system institutes con sumption as control , as the abolition of the contingency of demand, as planned socialization by the code (of which advertising, style, etc . are only glaring examples) . The contradictions do not end here, but are functionally integrated and neutralized by processes of differentiation and redistribution (processes which the competitive system, in the area of labor power, did not have at its disposal). Thus consumption, which characterizes the monopolistic era , implies something quite different from a phenomenology of affluence : it signifies the passage, by its contradictions, to a mode of strategic control, of predictive anticipation, of the absorption of the dialectic, and of the general homeopathy of the system. Demand and need correspond more and more to a mode of simulation. These new productive forces no longer pose questions to the system : they are an anticipated response, controlled in their very emer gence . The system can afford the luxury of contra diction and dialectic through the play of signs . It can indulge itself with all the signs of revolution . Since it produces all the responses, it annihilates the monopoly is stablized. Just as bipartisanism is the optimal political form for the functioning of monopoly power by a single class, so peaceful coexistence of two powers (soon three) is the stabilized form of world imperialism. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 27 question in the same blow. Only with the imposition and monopoly of the code is this possible. Whatever one does , one can only respond to the system in its own terms, according to its own rules, answering it with its own signs . the passage to this stage thus constitutes something more than the end of competition. It means that one goes from a system of productive forces, exploitation, and profit, as in the competitive system dominated in its logic by social labor time , to a gigantic operational game of question and answer, to a gigantic combinatory where all values commutate and are exchanged according to their operational sign. The mono polistic stage signifies less the monopoly of the means of production (which is never total) than the monopoly of the code. This stage is accompanied by a radical change in the functioning of the sign, in the mode of signification. The finalities of prestige and dis tinction still corresponded to a traditional status of the sign, in which a signifier referred back to a signified, in which a formal difference, a distinctive opposition (the cut of a piece of clothing, the style of an object) still referred back to what one could call the use value of the sign, to a differential profit, to a lived distinction (a signified value) . This is still the classical era of signification with its refer ential psychology ( and philosophy). It is also the competitive era in the manipulation of signs. The form-sign describes an entirely different organi zation : the signified and the referent are now abolished to the sole profit of the play of signifiers, of a generalized formalization in which the code no longer refers back to any subjective or objective "reality, " but to its own logic . The signifier be comes its own referent and the use value of the 1 28 CHAPTER S sign disappears to the benefit of its commutation and exchange value alone. The sign no longer desig nates anything at all . It approaches its true structural limit which is to refer b ack only to other signs . All reality then becomes the place of a semi urgical manipulation, of a structural simulation. And , whereas the traditional sign (also in linguistic exchanges) is the object of a conscious investment, of a rational calculation of signifieds, here it is the code that becomes the instance of absolute reference, and, at the same time , the object of a perverse desire . 8 There is a total homology with the sphere o f the commodity. The "traditional" commodity (up to the era of competitive capitalism) is at once exchange value and real use value. The proper and final relation of the subject with the produced object, the consumptive finality of the product, still exists, just as the use value of the signified in the classical organization of the sign . Already there is a general equivalence of production (the abstraction of exchange value), but not a general equivalence of consumption since the products maintain a concrete finality. With monopolistic capitalism, the same mutation occurs in the sphere of the sign ; the final reference of the products, their use value, completely disappears . Needs lose all their auto nomy ; they are coded . Consumption no longer has a value of enjoyment per se ; it is placed under the constraint of an absolute finality which is that of production. Production, on the contrary, is no longer assigned any finality other than itself. This total reduction of the process to a single one of its 8. Cf. Baudrillard, "Fetishisme et ideologie, " Nouvelle revue de psychanalyse 2 (Fall, 1 970). THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 29 terms, in which the others are only excuses (use value is the excuse for exchange value ; the referent is. the excuse for the code) designates more than an evolution of the capitalist mode : it is a mutation. Through the elevation of production to a total abstraction (production for its own sake) , to the power of a code , which no longer even risks being called into question by an a bolished referent, the system succeeds in neutralizing not only con sumption, but production itself as a field of contra dictions . Productive forces as a referent ("objective" substance of the production process) and thus also as a revolutionary referent (motor of the contradictions of the mode of production) lose their specific impact , and the dialectic no longer operates between productive forces and relations of production, just as the "dialectic" no longer operates between the substance of signs and the signs themselves. 9 Contradiction and Su bversion : The Dzsplacement of the Polz'tical With the generalization of political economy, it becomes more and more evident that its first principle is not in the exploitation of labor as a productive force , where Marxist analysis examined it, but in the imposition of a form , of a general code of rational abstraction, in which capitalist rationali zation of material production is only a particular case . The domestication of language in the code of 9. Economically, this process culminates in the virtual inter national autonomy of finance capital, in the uncontrollable play of floating capital. Once currencies are extracted from all productive cautions, and even from all reference to the gold standard, general equivalence becomes the strategic place of the manipulation. Real production is everywhere subordinated to it. This apogee of the system corresponds to the triumph of the code. 130 CHAPTER 5 signification, the domestication of all social and symbolic relations in the schema of representation, are not only contemporary with political economy, they are its very process. And it is here , in these "superstructural" realms today that it presents its form and radicalizes itself. The capitalist system , tied to profit and to exploitation, is only the inaugural modality, the infantile phase of the system of political economy. The schema of value (exchange and use) and of general equivalence is no longer limited to the area of "production" : it has permeated the spheres of language , of sexuality, etc. The form has not changed (hence one can speak of a political economy of the sign , of a political economy of the body, without metaphor) . But the center of . gravity has been displaced ; the epicenter of the contemporary system is no longer the process of material production. This is not to say that, at bottom , the political economy of l anguage , of the sign , of representation did not begin well before that of material production . If the quantitative operationalization of productive forces has been able to serve, for nearly two centuries , as the fundamental reference, this is perhaps only an apparent movement. For a much longer period, the operationalization of the code has been fundamental (division, abstraction, functional systematization and structural arrangement) . It is this that unfolds today in all its consequences . But it is not a matter of changing the determinant instance and reversing the priorities : this would be a re gression to a naive idealism that privileges the contents of representation whereas a naive material ism privileges the contents of production. There is nothing to choose between these two alternatives. The system itself does not present this difficulty : it THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 3 1 comprises neither materialism nor idealism, nor infrastructure nor superstructure. It proceeds according to its form and this form carries along all of them at the same time : production and repre sentation, signs and commodities, language and labor power . It is its own determination in the last instance . It is on this form that today is inscribed, at all levels, terror and social abstraction. The truly capitalist phase of forced socialization through labor and the intensive mobilization of pro ductive forces has been overturned. We have now a desublimation of productive forces , not by the lessening of the contradictions between the logic of the system and the world, but, on the contrary, through its logical process of expanded repro duction. Everything happens as if industrial coercion , disciplined concentration, the more and more extensive integration of the masses in the apparatus of production since the 1 9th century, the planned crystallization of all energies into material production were only a provisional solution , gigantic but temporary, for a project of rationalization and social control whose scope largely overcomes this phase . Surplus value, profit, exploitation - all these "objective realities" of capital have no doubt worked to mask the immense social domestication, the immense controlled sublimation of the process of production, appearing only as the tactical side of the process. The system is repro.duced today through a reverse tactic : no longer one of general mobili zation, but of techno-structural rationalization, that has as its effect the corruption of all the c ategories, or rather, a greater and greater fraction of the productive social time of all categories. It is no longer in the sphere of productive exploitation, but in the "demobilized, " the repressively "desubli- 1 32 CHAPTER S mated" sphere, in relation to production, that the contradictions today emerge. After forced industrialization and direct exploi tation come prolonged education, studies subsidized for twenty-five years, endless personal development, and recycling : everything is apparently destined to multiply and differentiate social productivity. In fact, the system needs this sophistication, this versa tility, this truly unlimited personal development , but only for a statistically limited group at a very high social level . At most, it is achieved by a very mobile group of versatile technocrats who assume all decision-making functions , and by a mass of dis qualified persons, who are on their own and socially irresponsible while having the illusion of parti cipation and personal growth. l O All the institutions of "advanced democracy, " all "social conquests" concerning growth , culture, personal and collective creativity, all of this is , as it has always been , simply the right of private property, the real right of the few. And for everyone else there are day-care centers and nurseries, institutions of social control in which the productive forces are deliberately neutralized. For the system no longer needs universal produc tivity ; it requires only that everyone play the game. This leads to the paradox of social groups who are compelled to fight for a place in the circuit of work and of productivity, the paradox of generations who are left out or placed off limits by the very development of the productive forces. The reverse of capitalism's initial situation . l l From this circum- 1 0 . This division is already in effect at the level of the grandes ecoles and the universities. 1 1 . For example, in the United States the establishment of an indefinite salary-unemployment that neutralizes entire groups as producers while maintaining them as consumers. It is no THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 3 3 stance new contradictions are born. For i f the exploited class bore a violent contradiction it was still in the order of an integration, of a socialization, brutal and forced, but nevertheless one of socialization in the order of the general productive system . Revolt emerged against the integration of labor power as a factor of production. The new social groups, de facto dropouts, on the contrary, proved the incapacity of the system to "socialize the society" in its traditionally strategic level, to dynamically integrate them , even by violent contra diction at the level of production. And it is on the basis of their total irresponsibility that these marginal generations carry on the revolt . This revolt can remain ambiguous if it is experienced as anomie and as defeat, if it occupies by default the marginal position assigned to it by the system or if it is insti tutionalized as marginal . But it is enough that it radically adopts this forced exteriority to the system in order to call the system into question, no longer as functioning in the interior but from the exterior, as a fundamental structure of the society, as a code , as a culture, as an interiorized social space . The whole system of production would then be disinvested ; it would teeter on this social void that it itself produced. All its positivity would crumble on this non-place, on this disaffected zone and those who are left alone would return their total disaffection to the system. Subversion is born there, an elsewhere, longer a question of the strategy of "the reserve army of capital , " but o f testing everyone and, a s i n school (this society puts every one in school) of having ready and available (at a cost of enormous financial "sacrifices," but who does not make them for the reproduction of the system? ) a whole social group who becomes the idle and parasitic clients of the system. There is no longer savage exploitation but tutellage and exile. 1 34 CHAPTER S whereas contradiction operates at the interior of the system .12 Hence there is a major role for students, youth who are disqualified in advance , voluntarily or not, as well as all types of social groups, of regional communities, ethnic or linguistic , because, by the process of the centralization and technocratic pyramidalization of the system , they fall into marginality, into the periphery, into the zone of dis affection and irresponsibility. Excluded from the game, their revolt henceforth aims at the rules of the game . Desocialized, they defeat the capitalist social reality princzple , and not merely their exploitation by the system. Segregated, discriminated against, satellitized   they are gradually relegated to a position of non-marked terms by the structuration of the system as a code . Their revolt thus aims at the abolition of this code, this strategy composed of distinction, separations, discriminations, oppositions that are structured and hierarchized. The Black revolt aims at race as a code , at a level much more radical than economic exploitation . The revolt of women aims at the code . that makes the feminine a non-marked term . The youth revolt aims at the extremity of a process of racist discrimination in which it has no right to speak. The same holds for all those social groups that fall under the structural bar of repression, of relegation to a place where they lose their meaning. This position of revolt is no longer that of the economically exploited ; it aims 1 2. But we can always ask if this demobilization, this virtual lockout, answers the secret demands of the calculation of pro ductivity, hence of the system itself in its reproduction (since it goes so far as to finance unproductive marginality) or if it con stitutes, through disinvestment and growing defection, a model of subversion. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 35 less at the extortion of surplus value than at the imposition of the code, which inscribes the present strategy of social domination. The more the system becomes concentrated, the more it expels whole social groups . The more it becomes hierarchized according to the law of value (sign or commodity) the more it excludes whoever resists this law. So it was that madness was confined (Michel Foucault) at the threshold of Western rationality. Today it is the same for all civil society, which has become a place of confinement where tranquillized man is closely watched. Everywhere behind the factory and the school , the suburb or the office, the museum or the hospital, it is the asylum and the ghetto that are profiled as the purest form of a truly rationalized society. This terrorist rationality has produced, in the course of centuries, the radical distinction of the masculine and the feminine with the "racial" infe riorization and sexual objectification of the feminine. No culture but ours has produced this systematic abstraction in which all the elements of symbolic exchange between the sexes have been liquidated to the profit of a binary functionality. And this separation , which has taken on all of its force with capitalist political economy, is not reabsorbed at the present time . Sexual hyperacti vism , equalization of the sexes, "liberation of desire, " in short, the "Sexual Revolution, " gives only the illusion of symbolic destructuring under the sign of sex as a differential mark, as an index of status and as a function of pleasure. It is this mark that the women's revolt (or the gay liberation) aims at, not the claims, democratic and rationalist, of political or sexual rights to equality (the equivalent of the salary claims of the worker) . Not the accession of women to 1 3 6 CHAPTER S power , that is , the turning of the code to their favor, but the abolition of the code . M arxism has either ignored this subversion of the political economy of sex, that is, the imposition of the law of value in the sexual domain , the imposition of the phallus, the masculine, as the general sexual equivalent, or else it has "dialectically" subordinated it to economic contradictions, allowing all of its radicality to escape . The same observations hold for racial discrimi nation. No other culture besides ours has produced the systematic distinction of B lack and White. And this distinction applies not as an afterthought but as a structural element which is reproduced ever more dynamically today under the appearances of faltering liberal universalism. And the objectifi cation of the Black as such is not that of exploited labor power, but an objectification by the cod e . One can easily verify that it is sustained by a whole arsenal of significations, irreducible to economic and political determinations. The emancipated or embourgeoisified Black remains a Black, just as the proletarianized immigrant remains first of all an immigrant, as the jew remains a jew. Again the code re-emerges with more violence in everything that would seem to suppress it. In M arxist terms, the superstructure is imposed with more force as the contradictions connected to the infrastructure are resolved, which is to say the least , paradoxical . Here again , the autonomization of the Black as the principle of revolution, as well as the autonomi zation of women as sex or of the proletariat as class, only renews the racial or sexual code , the game of political economy, simply by displacing the marked term . THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 37 The other form of discrimination against youth is not at all a secondary effect of class domination or economic exploitation, but the most explosive consequence of the present system . The hierarchical monopoly over decision-making circumscribes more and more under the zero term of social significance. Youth occupies the most critical non-place of the code, but not as an age group . If its revolt has reper cussions everywhere, it is because this non-pl ace crosses all social categories. In the economy, in politics, in science and in culture, today it is irre sponsibility that is crucial. It is a revolt of those who have been pushed aside, who have never been able to speak or have their voices heard. Speech itself is defined as an incessant response (responsibility) , in which all social transcendence is dissolved. Against the spoken word, political economy, throughout its history, supports discourse in which everything that is exchanged is put under the instance of the code . At the side of all the dis criminations, the markings and demarkings of which we have spoken, the system produced a fundamental separation of the signifier from signified . Through it and the whole logic of communications that it insti tutes, the system has succeeded, slowly but inex orably, in neutralizing the symbolic power of the spoken word . Binary structuring, the abstraction of representational discourse, the general equivalent and foreclosure of the code - these are the elements of the logic - of the system .'13 The insurrectional practice of the past few years has given new voice to 1 3 . Linguistics and semiology administer, by "scientific" analyses, this social exclusion of the spoken word. They defend the code because in its the life and death of the system is played out not in a sensational way, but in a political way nonetheless. 1 38 CHAPTER 5 the spoken word and eclipses traditional contra dictions . These revolts do not profile class struggle. But capitalism and its weakness evolve . Buried until now under the "determinant instance" of the mode of production, they surface according to the logic of the expanded reproduction of the system . The ethnic and linguistic minorities, repressed and en slaved in the thread of history by bureaucratic cen tralization ; the oppression of women, children, youth, also the elderly ; the whole cycle of repression and adjustment organized within the nuclear family as the structure of the reproduction of the order of production ; polymorphous, non-genital, "perverse" sexuality' liquidated or submerged by the genital principle of sexual reality ; nature as a productive force subjected to total spoilation - in these cases and in others the process of capitalism crosses the entire network of natural , social , sexual and cultural forces, all languages and codes. In order to function, capitalism needs to dominate nature, to domesticate sexuality, to rationalize language as a means of communication , to relegate ethnic groups , women, children and youth to genocide , ethnocide and racial discrimination. One must not see here, as in rigid Marxism , simple excrescences or even attempts at diversion from the fundamental theme that still would remain as always the "class struggle . " In this doctrinaire confusion there is a mystification of Marxist thought which, by circumscribing the economy as the fundamental determination, allows mental, sexual, and cultural structures to function efficaciously. But, if capitalism has , through the centuries, played on all the "superstructural" ideo logies in order to let the steam out of economic con- THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 39 traditions today the strategy is reversed . The system now plays on the economic reference (well-being, consumption, but also working conditions, salaries, productivity, growth) as an alibi against the more serious subversion that threatens it in the symbolic order . It is the economic sphere, with its partial contradictions that today acts as an ideological factor of integration . By making itself an accomplice of this diversion, Marxism is very simply exploited by capitalism as a force in ideological labor (spon taneous and benevolent). Everything that today gives priority to the economic field in salary claims or theorizing the economy as the l ast instance (Seguy or Althusser) is "objectively" idealist and reactionary. The radical subversion is transversal to the extent that it crosses the contradictions connected with the mode of production, and non-dialectical to the extent that there is no dialectical negativity in the relation between a repressed , non-marked term and a marked term . There can only be transgression of the line and deconstruction of the code . 14 This sub version telescopes "traditional" contradictions. But they do not converge since they are separated by a strategic mutation of the system . A conjuncture of the working class and the students (or, the idle young and the workers) under the pious invocation of a common exploitation is impossible . The respective demands diverge, and they diverge more and more despite the desperate efforts of the student and Leftist movement in "politicizing" their subversion by an immersion in the working class . On the one 14. But one can also aim to simply pass to the other side of the line in order to become the marked term, to change positions without breaking the code : The "White" Black man, etc. 140 CHAPTER 5 hand are the workers who obstinately defend, on the basis of the salary system a nd their integration in the industrial system, their "right to work" and the advantages the system yields them .l5 On the other are the Leftists, the social groups (of sex, age, race, ethnicity, language, culture , knowledge - all "super structural" criteria that are historically overcome according to the rationalist perspective of the class struggle) who are demobilized, demarked, excluded, and in whom the ethic of the system crumbles . Between these two forces the gap grows larger and cannot be bridged. The working class is no longer the gold standard of revolts and contradictions. There is no longer a revolutionary subject of reference . The hope to dialecticize, to articulate a subversive movement which calls the system into question as code , as a total l anguage of repression and separation, together with the class contra dictions that call the system into question as a mode of production and exploitation, is simply part of the reveries of political voluntarism . However, something else appears at the very level of the production process . Here also a secret defection lurks and expands as the ulcer of capitalism . Everywhere the work ethic , the secular "instinct of workmanship, " the ethic of individual and collective sublimation of the labor process (paradoxically reactivated today by the unions and the "workers' party") are dislocated. One sees (in May, 1 968, "Never Work , " but also in strikes at Fiat, at Usinor with its strike for the sake of striking, without bread and butter demands) practices 1 5 . Until now they appear archaic in front of technocratic reformism : choice of work schedule, job enrichment, anti assembly line. The unions resist innovation perhaps justly, but on a conservative basis. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 4 1 emerge that not only deny exploitation, but work itself as the principle of reality and rationality, as axiomatic . It is no longer then a question of an internal , dialectical negativity in the mode of production, but a refusal , pure and simple, of production as the general axiomatic of social relations. Without any doubt, the refusal is hidden in salary and corporativist demands ; in midstream it is transposed into a carefully asphyxiated and chan neled radical 16 denegation by the Parties and the unions, for whom , just as for the system itself, economic demands are the ideal means of control and manipulation. This is what gives the new left or hippie movement its meaning. Not the open revolt of a few, but the immense, latent defection, the . endemic, masked resistance of a silent majority, but one nostalgic for the spoken word and for violence. Something in all men profoundly rejoices in seeing a car burn. (In this sense , youth is only the exponential category of a latent process in the entire social expanse , without exception for age or "objective" condition. ) On the other hand, the new left commits suicide if it pretends to have statistical significance, to become a mass "political" force . Here it is irre mediably lost at the level of representation and of traditional poli ical contradiction (the same holds true for the American counter-culture) . Political R evolution and "Cultural " Revolution During the last hundred years, capitalism has been able to prevent serious social and political changes by absorbing contradictions when they were posed only at the level of material production. Con tradition only becomes radical when, as is the case 1 6 . This would mean that traditional contradictions no longer have any apparent meaning. But perhaps they never had? 142 CHAPTER 5 today, it reaches a level of total social relations. It is by expanding the field of social abstraction to the level of consumption, signification, information and knowledge, by expanding its jurisdiction and control to the whole field of culture and daily life, even to the unconscious , that the system has resolved the partial contradictions connected with economic relations of production. Through a restoration that has taken a century to accomplish, capitalism, by radicalizing its own logic, also has succeeded m radically altering the Marxist definitions o f contradiction and revolution. The "cultural revolution, " which corresponds to the radicalized logic of capital, to "in depth" imperialism,17 is not the developed form of all economic-political revolution. It acts on the basis of a reversal of "materialist" logic. Against the materialist postulate according to which the mode of production and the reproducion of social relations are subordinated to relations of material pro duction , one can ask if it is not the production of social relations that determiens the mode of material reproduction (the development of productive forces and relations of production) . A genealogy of social relations shows many criteria of domination other than the private ownership of the means of production. Species, race, sex , age, language , culture, signs of either an anthropological or cultural type - all these criteria are criteria of difference, of signification and of code . It is a simplistic hypothesis that makes them all "descen dants" in the l ast instance of economic exploitation. 1 7 . The economic and political planetary extension of capitalism is only the "extensive" modality of this deepening of capital . Moreover, it is to this level that the analysis of "imperialism" is in general limited. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 143 On the contrary, it is truer to say that this hypothesis is itself only the rationalization of an order of domi nation reproduced through it. A domination that plays the economic as a tactic , a detour and an alibi. Today the essential fact is no longer profit or exploi tation. Perhaps it was never so even in the Golden Age and Iron A ge of capitalism. It is directly at the level of the production of social relations that capitalism is vulnerable and en route to perdition. Its fatal malady is not its incapacity to reproduce itself economically and politically, but its incapacity to reproduce itself sym bolically . The symbolic social relation is the uninterrupted cycle of giving and receiving, which, in primitive exchange, includes the consumption of the "surplus" and deli berate anti-production whenever accumulation (the thing not exchanged, taken and not returned, earned and not wasted, produced and not destroyed) , risks breaking the reciprocity and begins to generate power. It is this symbolic relation that the political economy model (of capital), whose only process is that of the l aw of value, hence of appro priation and indefinite accumulation, can no longer produce . It is its radical negation. What is produced is no longer symbolically exchanged and what is not symbolically exchanged (the commodity) feeds a social relation of power and exploitation . It is this fatality of symbolic disintegration under the sign of economic rationality that capitalism cannot escape . One can also say, with Cardan, that its fundamental contradiction is no longer between the development of productive forces and relations of production, but in the impossibility of having people "participate . " However, the term "parti cipation" has a connotation that is much too contractual and rationalist to express the nature of 144 CHAPTER S the symbolic . Let us say that the system is structurally incapable of liberating human poten tials except as productive forces, that is, according to an operational finality that leaves no room for the reversion of the loss, the gift, the sacrifice and hence for the possibility of symbolic exchange. The example of consumption is significant . The feudal system died because it could not find the path to rational productivity. The bourgeoisie knew how to make the people work, but it also narrowly escaped destruction in 1 929 because it did not know how to make them consume. It was content , until then , to socialize people by force and exploit them through labor. But the crisis in 1 929 marked the point of asphyxiation : the problem was no longer one of production but one of circulation. Consumption became the strategic element ; the people were henceforth mobilized as consumers ; their "needs" became as essential as their labor power . By this operation, the system assured its economic survival at a fantastically expanded level. But something else is at play in the strategy of con sumption. By allowing for the possibility of expanding and consuming, by organizing social re distribution (social security, allotments , salaries that are no longer defined as the strict economic reproduction of labor power) by launching adver tising, human relations, etc . , the system- created the illusion of a symbolic participation (the illusion that something that is taken and won is also redistri buted, given, and sacrificed) . In fact, this entire symbolic simulation is uncovered as leading to super profits and super-power . In spite of all its good will (at least among those capitalist who are aware of the necessity of tempering the logic of the system in order to avoid an explosion in the near future) , it THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 145 cannot make consumption a true consummation, a festival, a waste. To consume is to start producing again. All that is expended is in fact invested ; nothing is ever totally lost. Even when coffee stocks burn, when enormous wealth is squandered in war, the system cannot stop having this lead to a widening reproduction. It is caught in the necessity of producing, accumulating, making a profit. Its assistance to developing countries is returned in multiple profits. Even if the liberal experts denounce, as they have for twenty years, the catas trophe that will come at the end of this process, the rich nations cannot reduce (even if they clearly wanted to) , at the cost of real sacrifices, the gulf that separates them from the Third World. And this also means that each individual , each consumer , is locked into the profitable manipulation of goods and signs for his own interest . He can no longer really waste his time in leisure. 18 Inexorably, he re produces , at his own level, the whole system of political economy : the logic of appropriation, the impossibility of waste, of the gift, of loss , the inexo rability of the law of value. There is the same con juncture at the political level. Power consists in the monopoly of the spoken word ; the spoken word (decision, responsibility) is no longer exchanged. But this situation is explosive ; those who have power know it. And we see them desperately attempting to divest themselves of a portion of the spoken word, of redistributing a part of the responsibilities in order to avoid a boomerang of the kind that occurred in May, 1968. But they cannot do it. They would like to have participation, but participation is revealed each time as being only 1 8 . Cf. Baudrillard, La societe de consommation (Paris : Denoel, 1970). 146 CHAPTER 5 a better tactic for the wider reproducton of the system . The more autonomy is given to everyone , the more decision-making is concentrated at the summit .19 Just as in 1929, when the system almost died from an inability to circulate production, so today it is perishing from an inability to circulate the spoken word. Because it is a system of production, it can only reproduce itself. It can no longer achieve any symbolic integration (the reversibility of the process of accumulation in festivals and waste , the reversibility of the process of production in destruction, the reversibility of the process of power in exchange and death) . At all levels, the system is sick from desub limation, from liberalization, from tolerance, while seeking to transcend itself in order to survive. Con sumption , satisfaction of needs, sexual liberation, women's rights, etc . , etc . - it is prepared to grant anything in order to reduce social abstraction so that people will play the game . But it cannot do it, once again, because this liberalization is only hyper repressive. Needs which were once contingent and heterogeneous are homogenized and definitively rationalized according to the models of the system . Sexuality, which was once repressed, i s liberated a s a game of signs . It objectifies sexuality as the func tionality of the body and the profitability of the pleasure principle. Information is liberated, but only in order to be better managed and stylized by the media. Everywhere the pressure of the system of political economy is heightened. The final avatars are anti-pollution and job enrichment. Here also the 1 9 . The autonomy of the faculties is, as we know, the best means of aligning them with capitalist productivity, just as the independence of colonial nations was the best means of perpetuating and modernizing their exploitation. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 147 system seems to slacken its limits and restore nature and work in their dignity : a desublimation of productive forces in relation to traditional exploi tation. But we know very well that a symbolic relation of man to nature or to his work will not re emerge here. There will only be a more flexible and reinforced operationality of the system. We are faced with coding, super-coding, univer salization of the code, proliferating axiomatization of the capitalist system (Deleuze). But against the triumphant abstraction, against the irreversible monopolization, the demand arises that nothing can be given without being returned, nothing is ever won without something being lost, nothing is ever produced without something being destroyed, nothing is ever spoken without being answered . In short, what haunts the system is the symbolic demand . The Economic as Ideology and Simulation Model Against subversion by the symbolic , which to some degree arises under the l abel "cultural revolution, " the capitalist system has every interest in diverting it through "closetting" the contradictions within the economic realm . Autonomizing the economic is an ideological strategy. Bourdieu describes 20 the same phenomenon in relation to scholarly and cultural systems . The scholarly and cultural systems are permitted to have formal autonomy (which is theorized as transcendence and is presented as a democratic and universal truth - equality of in struction and culture for each-while class structure is reversed for the order of production) . It is through this autonomy effect and behind this simulacrum of 20. La reproduction (Paris : Minuit, 1 970). 148 CHAPTER 5 transcendence that the system better carries out its ideological function and renews most efficaciously the dominant social relations. One can ask if it serves only to reproduce them and if it is not the place of a specific production of class domination. For this implies a reversal of the terms of analysis : the economic can appear in our societies as the most important place of the equalization of opportunity, of the least conservatism of social relations, etc . (historically, since the appearance of the bour geoisie, the economy has always played the role of the springboard of emancipation as compared to the more conservative juridical , religious, and cultural structures) . And perhaps it is the scholarly and cultural systems that play the decisive role in the production of social relations, while the economic only relays and shifts them in their reproduction. In any case , the ideological process, as it emerges in Bourdieu's analysis, has not changed and it can be generalized as follows : ideology always proceeds by an autonomization of a partial totality ; all autonomized partial totalities immediately have an ideological value. This is the way Bourdieu treats the scholarly system . But all partial fields , in particular the economic , can, for the same reason, act as ideological fields, once erected as an autonomous instance ( and even determinant) . But the autonomi zation of the economic sphere is common to capitalism and to Marxism . 1. All autonomized partial social fields become, at the same time, the place of a universalist and egalitarian myth : religion was in its time ; scholarly and cultural systems are today ; consumption as a function isolated from production is rapidly becoming one . But the economic sphere affirms itself in its autonomy when faced with the religious, THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 49 the cultural , etc . , as the sphere of social rationality , as the universal instance of productivity (here again the Marxists are no different from the bourgeois economists) , and thus as an egalitarian myth. Each is equal in rights before the objective reason of production. 2. The economic sphere is supported by science. For all detached fields as such secrete a myth of rigor, of objectivity, of truth . Objectivity and truth are only the effect of the parcellization of a field of knowledge, of its autonomization under certain rules. Being closed off from everything else by a perfect and fragmented knowledge, that is the imaginary of the exact sciences , and the desire of science is nothing but the fascination with miscom prehension. Political economy as a science of the detached is thus properly ideological and the critique of political economy, when it wishes itself to be "scientific" (materialist) , only serves to reinforce its object as a detached abstraction. There are no economic truths, or better, we have fashioned the truth of the economic as an arbitrary instance . 3. All partial fields, including the economic , are the fields of contradiction which are also partial. The place of the fundamental contradiction - the place of politics today - is the line of separation between the partial fields. And revolution is not the resolution of partial contradictions, but the abolition of this line. The internal contradictions in the partial fields are the echo of the separation that haunts them. It is their point of origin. They are thus ambiguous : at the same time that they manifest an obsession with non-separation, they reinforce the separations by autonomizing them as internal contradictions. Their resolution can never go beyond the separation, which is why it is never final. 150 CHAPTER 5 They are resolved in a flight from the p artial system under the obsession with separation (others would say with castration). Such is the process of political economy ; such is the zmagznary of political economy (Cardan) . The whole materialist critique of ideology, the denunciation of the autonomization of the values of consciousness, of culture, of the simulation of a reality principle of ideas, this whole critique is turned back against materialism in an integral way , that is, against the autonomization of the economic insofar as it is a (determinant) instance . The economic appears everywhere as the theori zation of the rupture with symbolic exchange, as the institution of a detached field that then becomes the vector of a total reorganization of social life . It is the simulation of a universal finality of c alculation and productive rationality, the simulation of a deter mination whereas symbolic exchange knows of neither determination nor end. It is the simulation of a reality of this instance, of an economic reality principle that goes on to universalize itself on the basis of the very principle of separation . Today this model is found in its completed form with operational models, with the simulation of situations having the purpose of prediction and control , with operational artifacts replacing reality and the code of the reality principle . 2 1 C ardan says , "The rationality o f modern society is only in its form : it is the syllogism of growth, camouflaged as the historical dialectic of the 2 1 . Thus idealist simulation and materialist simulation are joined. Their common schema is the separation of instances under the jurisdiction of one of them (the same schema as in the semiological reduction). Cf. Nouvelle revue de psychanalyse, op. cit. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 5 1 development o f productive forces. But in this syllogism, the premises borrow their content from the imaginary. And the prevalence of the syllogism as such , the obsession with a rationality detached from everything else, constitutes an imaginary to the second degree. Modern pseudo-rationality is a form of the imaginary in history. I t is arbitrary in its ulti mate ends as long as these ends do not reveal any rationality. And it is arbitrary when it posits itself as end (this holds for logical reason and for "dialectical" reason) . In this respect, the modern world is prey to a systematic delirium , of which the autonomization of unfettered technology ( and bureaucracy) is the most immediately perceptible and menacing form . . . The economy exhibits, in the most striking fashion, the domination of the imaginary at all levels. " The symbolic is the abolition of the imaginary of political economy ( and of all other detached fields) . In this sense, the cultural revolution is no longer tied to the economic-political revolution. It cuts through the economic-political as a partial revolu tionary discourse and, in a certain rationalizing and mystifying way. A revolution that aims at the totality of life and social relations will be made also and primarily against the autonomization of the economic , of which the last ("revolutionary" and materialist) avatar is the autonomization of the mode of production under the form of a determinant instance. Because today the system has no better strategy than that of the dialectic of political economy, the cultural revolution must make itself against the economic-political revo lution. 152 CHAPTER 5 Marxist Theory and the Workers ' Movement : The Concept of Class This revolutionary potentiality, this subversion directed against the axiomatic of productive rationality itself (including its internal contra dictions) is no longer accounted for by a Marxist analysis of class and mode of production . Marxism is incapable of theorizing total social practice (including the most radical form of Marxism) except to reflect it in the mirror of the mode of production. It cannot lead to the dimensions of a revolutionary "politics . " From our current position, M arxist analysis , in its revolutionary rationality, no longer illuminates either modern societies or primitive societies. Retrospectively, moreover, it is necessary to ask if it has not always been thus, if already in M arx's time the theory of the mode of production did not effect an extraordinary simplification of social practice. If it no longer accounts for the present mode of revolution, did it, at least for a given moment of history (the "classical" capitalist phase) account for fundamental contradictions? Did the mode of production ( and with it class and class struggle) have its hour of truth? The sacrilegious hypothesis is here imposed that the conjuncture in the 1 9th century of Marxist theory and the workers' movement perhaps had not been the miracle of history - the greatest event in history, says Althusser - but a process of reczprocal reduction and neutralization . The objective histori cal result was the choking of both in the Leninist political mixture , later in the Stalinist bureaucracy, and today in the most vulgar reformist empiri cism . These are the stages of a long decline that it would be too simple to impute to a few distortions THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 5 3 along the way. The deep logic o f this decline forces us to return beyond Stalin, beyond Lenin, etc . , b ack to the crucial point of the thought of Marx himself, back to the original event, which is always conceived as irrevocably revolutionary, of the dialectical con juncture of his theory and the objective social practice of a class called the proletariat. We have so lived in the providential shadow of this event that the idea that this fusion was not necessary, nor neces sarily the best, has never truly been formulated. Social revolt and the movement of the theory, each indexing themselves on the other, each verifying themselves in the thread of history, were univer salized as historical reason, under the sign of the dialectical revolution. But they were lost as society's radical differ nce. In effect, the fusion was not made between a radical revolt and a radical theory, both of them "primitive" and non-determined (as was the case in the insurrectional movements of the 1 9th century up to the Commune of 1 8 7 1 and again in May, 1 968) but between two terms that were already distinct and slanted by each other. If you wish , this is dialectical but it is necessary to see that what is dialecticized, that upon which Marxist theory hinges, is a social reality ·'specified" as a class, as an objective and conscious organization, as a proletariat. What is grasped in theory as proletarian organization is a well -determined social critique in terms of a mode of production·, relations of production and class . On one side there is an "objective" and organized class and on the other side there is a rational and structured theory ( as much in its materialist content as in its dialectical form) - it is between these two terms , each rationalized in the image of the other, that the dialectic of revolution has been short- 1 54 CHAPTER 5 circuited . It is difficult to evaluate all that has been repressed and eliminated in this operation which brings out once and forever, under the sign of materialism, history, and the dialectic , the revolutionary reality princzple. Let us say that everything that a "pleasure principle" and a radicality of revolt would reveal and can still be read in the insurrectionists of the 1 9th century, in the destruction of machines, in pre-Marxist utopian and libertarian discourse, in the cursed poets or in the sexual revolt, and that aimed, well beyond material production, at a total symbolic configuration of life and social relations is destroyed by the abstract con figuration of political economy- that it is this whole primitive and radical movement that Marxist theory and socialist organz'zation, in their miraculous con junction, have dialecticized by treating it, under a class status and a "historical" content, as the development of productive forces. They rationalized it into a relation of antagonistic forces at the interior of a single social field, magnetized by political economy. But this revolt implied something different from a dialectic of forces . It implied the irruption of a radical difference, something far different from surplus value and the exploitation of l ab or power which is the corruption of all social relations by the unilateral rationality of production and universal socialization under the law of value. And the operation, if one looks at it closely, consisted in a "dialectical" rehabilitation of the status of the producer , towards which the revolt aimed, and of which Marxist theory itself made the point of departure of the social revolution. Marxism makes a revolutionary detour and a promise of liberation out of a process of destructuring and repression. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 5 5 (Nietzsche is right : the workers have elevated into a cardinal value the very sign of their slavery, just as the Christians did with suffering. ) And this revo lution is no longer for the here and now : it becomes a historical finality. Positivized under the sign of progress by the bourgeoisie, or dialecticized under the sign of revolution by Marxism, it is always the case of an imposition of a meaning, the rational projection of an objective finality opposing itself to the radicality of desire which, in its non-meaning, cuts through all finality. In relation to the situation created by massive industrialization, concentration-camp discipline, the rigid training of generations of artisans and peasants beginning in the 1 9th century, in relation to the situation of destructuring and revolt, Marxist theory and workers' organization have achieved overall a labor of historical rationalization, a certain kind of secondary elaboration : the valorization of labor as the source of social wealth, the valorization _ of the process of the rational development of productive forces , a process that was confused with the revolutionary project (surely through a "dialectical" negativity, but behind which was hidden irrevocably the confusion of this same class with labor as the social ethic of class) . The ethic of rational l abor, which is of bourgeois origin and which served historically to define the bourgeoisie as a class, is found renewed with fantastic amplitude at the level of the working class, also contributing to define it as a class, that is to circumscribe it in a status of historical repre sentability. Respect for the machine, protection for work instruments, implying virtual propriety (some kind of human right in opposition to legal right) and the 156 CHAPTER 5 future appropriation of the means of production, institutes the working class in a productivist vocation that takes the place of the historic vocation of the bourgeoisie. The fact that in the revolutionary project these means of production are restored to the disposition of those who produce, under the· sign of social appropriation and self-management, only gives an eternal quality to the process of production, beyond all changes in the mode of production. The "class of laborers" is thus confirmed in its idealized status as a productive force even by its revolutionary ideal . It reflects upon itself as "the most precious human capital, " as the myth of origin of social wealth. In the guise of historical materialism, the idealism of production ends by giving a positive definition to the revolutionary class . The class is then defined in the universal, according to the universality of labor power. It falls back upon an essence which in fact it was assigned by the bourgeois class and which defines it, in its historical being, by the universality of capital . Capital and l abor power then encounter each other as respective values, equally founded in the universal . 22 In this encounter of classes where each has its objective, historical reference, the bourgeois class always prevails. For this concept of class belongs to it and when it succeeds in trapping the proletariat in it, it has already won the game . The concept of class is a universalist and rationalist 22. This confusion is instituted once again by the fact that besides the exchange value of labor power - the level of exploi- . tation and dialectical contradiction - Marxist theory preserves a level of the use value of labor, a level that is irreducible to the positivity of value, that is, a mirror of a human positivity of labor where the proletarian class, sliding from the negative to the positive, comes to recognize itself. Use value, once again, plays a dirty trick on Marxist theory. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 5 7 concept , born i n a society o f rational production and of the calculation of productive forces. In a sense, there has always been and there will always be only one class, the bourgeoisie. This capitalist bourgeois class is defined not only by the ownership of the means of production, but by the rational finality of production . To make a class of the proletariat is hence to enclose it in an order of definition (characterized by "class consciousness" as "the subject of history") 23 in which the model remains 23. In this regard, the very beautiful dialectic of Lukacs in History and Class Consciousness takes on a totally ambiguous meaning. The rational vocation of the class as the subject of history, the articulation of this process through the consciousness that the class has of itself- in these notions the path is paved for hypostasizing the being of class, for the triumph of the reality principle and the representability of the class, hence, really for the triumph of the Party. At one level this dialectical and "spontaneous" collective class consciousness seems to contradict the bureaucratic process (this is why the Stalinists, always super ficial, violently attacked it). But at a more profound level, there is a collusion between a rationalist theory of class consciousness and the formal rationality of the bureaucracy. It is no accident that Lukacsian theory, dialectical and spontaneist, appears at the moment when the bureaucratic monopoly of the Party was historically reinforced. It did not object fundamentally to this process since, fixing a reflected essence, a class rationality, a for itself as the subject of history, it necessarily presented a logic of representation and identification together with an ideal instance (in some way the "ego ideal" of the class). This instance can only be the organization and the Party. To the imaginary subject of history corresponds profoundly the paranoic machine of the bureaucracy. (In the same way, the idealization of the conscious subject is contemporary, through all of Western history, with the extension of rational control by the State. It is the same operation that rebounds at the level of the class with Lukacs. ) He returned to Stalinism to write The Destruction of Reason in order to denouce the irrationality of fascism. But fascism is only irrational for bourgeois democracy. In fact, it incarnates an extreme of paranoic Reason, an extreme that "dialectical Reason" cannot argue against when it falls into the imaginary transcendence of a subject, of the proletarian class. Upon such an abstraction one can only build (and with Stalin, logically, will 158 CHAPTER S that of the bourgeoisie. Accession to the status of class is equivalent to a rationalization of the "workers' movement" and its revolt, equivalent to aligning it in the general rationality of the industrial order . Thus "class against class" can well signify antagonism at the level of the relation to the means of production, but this in no way breaks the fz'nality of productivity itself. On the contrary, but dialec ticizing it from within, this schema serves only to extend the process of political economy to infinity. If the class struggle has a meaning, it is not in the encounter of one class with another. (When the structure is reversed and the proletarian class triumphs, as in the East, nothing changes profoundly, as we know, in social relations. ) This meaning can only be the radical refusal of letting itself be enclosed in the being and consciousness of class. For the proletariat, it is to negate the bourgeoisie because the latter assigns it a class status. It must not negate itself insofar as it is deprived of the means of production (which is, unfortunately, the "objective" Marxist definition of class) ; it negates itself insofar as it is defined in terms of production and political economy. Can the proletariat have a meaning if it defines itself in terms be built) totalitarianism, that is, the total taking in charge, the. total control of the class by an organizational instance under the sign of Reason. Class consciousness, that idealist vision, yields but one mode of objective existence : the Party. It is not class consciousness, in its own movement, that bestows the Party or the organization as the dialectical mediation of its practice. It is the bureaucracy itself which, in line with the extension of its power, secretes class consciousness as its ideology. When he writes History and Class Consciousness, Lukacs is not anti Stalinist ; he is within the same movement as Stalinism. He gives the bureaucracy its philosophy of history, a reflexive philosophy of class as subject by which the triumphant bureaucracy can proceed historically to idealize its totalitarian practice. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 5 9 of productive forces, labor, historical rationality, etc . ? Evidently not. In this framework, the prole tariat (or any other possible class) is pledged to enter into the rational dialectic of a form and a content (on the one hand , the structure of classes , on the other , its own class values, when these are not its class "interests"!) . It is pledged to a finality of class that perfectly encloses it in the dialectical game of capitalist society. Bet er still , by reinforcing itself in its being, in proportion to the development of the class struggle, it reinforces the power of the ruling class, and its degraded opposition serves the reformist impulse of the capitalist system , when it does not reveal itself as even more conservative in the realm of values . This is where we are today . To what can we impute the historical blockage of the "revolutionary double negation" (the proletariat was well-born from the bourgeoisie , but it has not been born of itself as a class)? Lenin, even Stalin, the demise of the proletariat itself- are these dialectical accidents? Quite simply, the problem is the conjunc ture of a revolutioanry theory aiming at the abolition of classes, outlined by Marx , with a revolutionary subject (the real and historical class of salaried workers) . One cannot even say that the proletariat has slowly turned against itself. It has logically produced the substantialization of the social revolt in a theoretically untranscendable class, which was soon fixed in its being by the organization . Starting from there , the proletarian class and Marxist theory began mutually to justify one another and hence to neutralize each other. And the project of transforming life, as much the demand of Marx as that of the actual revolt, has placidly become the victory of the proletariat. 160 CHAPTER S Revolution as Finalz"ty : History in Suspense Along with the mode of production, the concept of history constitutes another index of this dialec tical rationalization. It is a homologous concept developed in a social structure at the time of the theorization of the mode of production (once again, the imposition, during the Renaissance, of a per spectival convergence as the reality principle of space , serving as a reference) . One can speak of a millenarian element m Marx : 24 communism as a "proximate future , " an imminent revolution. This "utopian" exigency dates from the Introduction to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right , the 1844 Manuscrzpts , the Theses on Feuerbach, and the Manifesto . After the failures of 1 848 , there was a reconversion. Com munism was no longer an immediate possibility of the present situation ; it could become a real possi bility only much later, at t he end of a period in which the necessary hzstorical conditions wz"ll have been created. 25 With Capital, one moves from the revolutionary utopia to a fully historical dialectic , from an immediate and radical revolt to an objective consideration of the situation . It is necessary that capitalism "mature, " that it inwardly become a social system through its own negation. Hence there is a logical and hz"storical necessity , a dialectical long march in which the negativity of the proletariat does not have an immediate effect on itself as a class but instead has a long-term effect on the process of capital . Engaged in this long "objective" detour, the 24. We are referring to the work of Kalivoda, Marx et Freud (Paris : Editions anthropos , 1 9 7 1 ) . . 25 . The same holds in Christian history ; the Christian concept of historicity is born from the failure of the parousia. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 6 1 proletariat begins t o reflect upon itself a s the negation and as the subject of history. 26 The effort of M arxism then diverges from its radical exigency toward the study of historical laws . The proletariat no longer leaps out of its shadow ; it grows larger in the shadow of capital. The revolution is housed in an implacable process of evolution at the end of which the laws of history require man to liberate himself as a social creature. The Marxist perspective does not abandon its radical exigency but it becomes a final exigency. There is a con version from the here-and-now to an asymptotic ful fillment, a deferred due date, indefinitely put off, which , under the sign of a historical reality principle (the objective socialization of society achieved by capital ; the dialectical process of maturation of the "objective" conditions of the revolution) , confirms the transcendence of an ascetic communism , a com munism of sublimation and hope. In the name of an always renewed future - future of history, future of the dictatorship of the proletariat, future of capitalism and future of socialism - it demands more and more the sacrifice of the immediate and permanent revolution·. Ascetic in relation to its own revolution , communism in effect profoundly suffers from not "taking its desires as reality. " 27 (The tran scendent dimension, the sublimation, is the same as 26. Socialism in a single country will be the realization of this qualification in which the proletariat is situated, of this substan tialization of negativity in which history as the final dimension becomes the objective dimension. At first the negative subject of the historical dialectic, it is then simply the positive subject of a positivist history of the revolution. This great slippage is only possible and only explained by the passage from utopia to the historical "epoche. " 27 . One of the famous statements of the students during May, 1 96 8 . [Translator's note] 1 62 CHAPTER 5 that of orthodox Christianity in opposition to the millenarian sects who wanted immediate fulfill ment, here below. As we know, sublimation is repressive. It is the basis fo the power of the Church. ) The revolution becomes a n end, not i n any sense the radical exigency that presumes, instead of counting on a final totalization, that man is already totally there in his revolt. Such is the meaning of utopia, if one distinguishes it from the dreaming idealism to which the "scientific ones" take pleasure in reducing it, only the better to bury it. It rejects the schema, diluting the contradictions. This ideal structuration , that has room for a " Reason" of history, for a conscious and logical organization of deferred revolution - this dialectic very rapidly falls into the pure and simple schema of end and means. The Revolution as "end " is in fact equivalent to the autonomzzation of the means. What has happened is clear : it has the effect of stifling the current situation, of exorcizing immediate subversion, of diluting (in the chemical sense of the term) explosive reactions in a long term solution. "Man should know to be satisfied with the per spective of his liberation . This is why 'revolutionary romanticism, ' revolt 'hie et nunc' will continue to thrive until the Marxist perspective ceases to be only a perspective" (Kalivoda). But , starting from the moment when Marxism enters into the game of the objectivity of history, when it resigns itself to the laws of history and the dialectic, can it be anything more than a "perspective"? In the era when Marx began to write, workers were breaking machines . Marx did not write for them. He had nothing to say to them . In his eyes they were even wrong ; it was the indus trial bourgeoisie that was revolutionary. Theoretical THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 63 lag does not at all explain it. This immanent revolt of the workers who broke machines has remained without explanation. With his dialectic , Marx was content to see them as mere babes in the wgods. But the whole workers' movement until the Commune lived by this utopian exigency of immediate socialism (Degacque , Courderoy, etc . ) . And they were such even in their defeat. For utopia is never written for the future ; it is always already present. Marx himself, speaking of the future, speaks of it as a transcended phase . But from what Olympian point of view can one judge him correct z"n advance? The failure of these movements (in contrast to the "Marxist" revolutions of the 20th century) is not a valid argument . That would simply involve invoking the "reason" of history, an objective end that would not be able to account for the specificity of a social speech that is not finalized by a future dimension. I t is there, i n the verdict of history, that international communism today looks for the only proof of its truth, that is, even more than before, in a dialectical reason, but also in the immanence of the facts . At this level history is no longer even a process ; it is simply a trial . And revolt is always condemned in a legal proceeding. The Radz"calz"ty of Utopz·a In fact, Marx is right , "objectively" right, but this correctness and this objectivity were won, as in all science, only at the cost of a mz"scomprehensz"on, a miscomprehension of the radical utopias contem porary with the Manifesto and Capz"tal. In saying that Marx "objectively" theorized capitalist social relations, the class struggle, the movement of h.istory, etc . , one has claimed too much. In effect , \1arx "objectified" the convulsion of a social order, 1 64 CHAPTER S its current subversion, the speech of life and death, the liberator of the very movement, in a long-term dialectical revolution, in a spiraling finality that was only the endless screw of political economy. 28 The cursed poet, non-official art, and utopian writings in general, by giving a current and immediate content to man's liberation, should be the very speech of communism , its direct prophecy. They are only its bad conscience precisely because in them something of man is immediately realized, because they object without pity to the "political" dimension of the revolution, which is merely the dimension of its final postponement . They are the equivalent, at the level of discourse, of the savage social movements that were born in a symbolic situation of rupture (symbolic - which means non universalized, non-dialectical , non-rationalized in the mirror of an imaginary objective history) . This is why poetry (not Art) was fundamentally connected only with the utopian socialist movements, with "revolutionary romanticism, " and never with Marxism as such . It is because the content of liberated man is, at bottom, of less importance than the abolition of the separation of the present and the future. The abolition of this form of time, the dimension of sublimation, makes it impossible to pardon the idealists of the dialectic , who are at the same time the realists of politics. For them the 28. It is not true that Marx "dialectically transcended" utopia by conserving its "project" in a "scientific" model of revolution. Marx wrote of the Revolution according to the law. He did not make a dialectical synthesis of its necessary date of maturity and the impassioned, immediate utopian exigency of the transfusion of social relations, because it is futile to claim a dialectic between these two antagonistic positions. What historical materialism did transcend while conserving was quite simply political economy. THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1 65 revolution must be distilled in history ; it must come on time ; it must ripen in the sun of the contra dictions. That it could be there immediately is unthinkable and insuffera ble . Poetry and the utopian revolt have this radical presentness in common , this denegation of finalities ; it is this actualization of desire no longer relegated to a future liberation, but demanded here, immediately, even in its death throes, in the extreme situation of life and death. Such is happiness ; such is revolution. It has nothing to do with the political ledger book of the Revolution. Contrary to Marxist analysis which posits man as dispossessed, as alienated and relates him to a total man , a total Other who is Reason and who is for the future (which is utopian, but in the bad sense of the term) , which assigns to man a project of totalization, utopia , for its part, would have nothing to do with the concept of alienation. It regards every man and every society as already totally there, at each social moment, in its symbolic exigency. Marxism never analyzes the revolt, or even the movement of society except as an intricate ornament of the revolution, as a reality on the way toward maturation. This is a racism of perfection, of the finished stage of reason. It throws everything else into a nothingness of things transcended. 29 Marxism IS still profoundly a philosophy, even its "scientific" stage, through all that remains in it of a vision of alienation. In terms of "alienation, " the other side of "critical" thought is always a total essence that haunts a divided existence. But this metaphysics of the totality is not 29. One takes a long time to outline the sketch of a work which, once completed, would be returned to oblivion and nothingness. But this is all wrong for the sketch already contains the whole work, and this alone is the work. 1 66 CHAPTER 5 at all opposed to the present reality of the division. It is complementary to it. For the subject, the prospect of recovering his transparence or his total "use value" at the end of history is just as religious a vision as the reintegration of essences. "Alienation" remains the imaginary of the subject, even of the subject of history. The subject will not become again a total man ; he will not rediscover himself; today he has lost himself. The totalization of the subject is still the end of the end of the political economy of con sciousness, confirmed by the identity of the subject, just as political economy is confirmed by the principle of equivalence . Instead of deluding men with a phantasm of their lost identity, of their future autonomy, this notion itself must be abolished . What an absurdity it is to pretend that men are "other, " to try to convince them that their deepest desire is to become "themselves" again! Each man is totally there at each instant . Society also is totally there at each instant . Courderoy, the Luddites, Rimb aud , the Communards, the people of the savage strikes , those of May, 1968- in every case the revolution does not speak indirectly ; they are the revolution, not concepts in transit. Their speech is symbolic and it does not aim at an essence . In these instances , there is speech before history, before politics, before truth, speech before the separation and the future totality. He is truly a revolutionary who speaks of the world as non-separated. There is no possible or impossible. The utopia is here in all the energies that are raised against political economy. But this utopian violence does not accumulate ; it is lost . It does not try to accumulate itself as does economic value in order to abolish death. It does not grasp for power . To enclose the "exploited" within the single historical possibility of THE SYSTEM OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 167 taking power has been the worst diversion the revolution has ever taken. One sees here to what depths the axioms of political economy have undermined, pervaded and distorted the revolu tionary perspective . Utopia wants speech against power and against the reality principle which is only the phantasm of the system and its indefinite repro duction. It wants only the spoken word ; and it wants to lose itself in it.   Preface Symbolic exchange is no longer the organising principle of modern soci- ety. Of course, the symbolic haunts modern social institutions in the form of their own death. Indeed, since the symbolic no longer rules these social forms, they experience it only as this haunting, and as a demand forever blocked by the law of value. Even though a certain idea of revo- lution has, since Marx, attempted to find a way past the law of value, it long since became a revolution in accordance with the Law. Even psy- choanalysis gravitates around this haunting, which it fends off while at the same time circumscribing it within an individualised unconscious, thus reducing it, under the Law of the Father, to the obsessional fear of castration and the Signifier. Always the Law. However, beyond the topol- ogies and economics, both libidinal and political, gravitating around a materialist or desiring-production on the stage of value, an outline of social relations emerges, based on the extermination of value. For us, the model of this relation harks back to primitive formations, but this radical utopia is slowly beginning to intrude at every level of contemporary society; this intoxicating revolt no longer has anything to do with the laws of history, nor even – but we will have to wait for a later stage for this to appear, since it is a recent phantasy – with the ‘liberation’ of a ‘desire’. In this light, other theoretical events, such as Saussure’s anagrams and Mauss’s gift-exchange, assume cardinal importance. In the long run, these hypotheses are more radical than Marx’s or Freud’s, whose interpretations are censored by precisely their imperialism. The anagrams or gift-exchanges are not merely transitory phases within the disciplines of linguistics and anthropology, nor are they inferior forms compared to the vast machina- tions of the unconscious and the revolution. Here one predominant form emerges, from which Marxism and psychoanalysis, though they may not be aware of it, derive. This form is equally dismissive of political and libidinal economy, outlining instead a beyond of value, a beyond of the law, a beyond of repression and a beyond of the unconscious. This is taking place here and now. When Freud proposes the theory of the death drive, this is the one theoretical event of the same order as the anagram and the gift, pro- vided we radicalise it against Freud himself. Indeed we must switch the targets of each of these three theories, and turn Mauss against Mauss, 23Preface Saussure against Saussure and Freud against Freud. The principle of revers- ibility (the counter-gift) must be imposed against all the economistic, psychologistic and structuralist interpretations for which Mauss paved the way. The Saussure of the Anagrams must be set against Saussurian linguistics, against even his own restricted hypotheses concerning the anagram. The Freud of the death drive must be pitched against every previous psychoanalytic edifice, and even against Freud’s version of the death drive. At the price of paradox and theoretical violence, we witness that the three hypotheses describe, in their own respective fields (but this propriety is precisely what the general form of the symbolic annihilates), a functional principle sovereignly outside and antagonistic to our economic ‘reality principle’. Everywhere, in every domain, a single form predominates: reversibility, cyclical reversal and annulment put an end to the linearity of time, lan- guage, economic exchange, accumulation and power. Hence the reversibility of the gift in the counter-gift, the reversibility of exchange in the sacrifice, the reversibility of time in the cycle, the reversibility of pro- duction in destruction, the reversibility of life in death, and the reversibility of every term and value of the langue in the anagram. In every domain it assumes the form of extermination and death, for it is the form of the symbolic itself. Neither mystical nor structural, the symbolic is inevitable. The reality principle corresponded to a certain stage of the law of value. Today the whole system is swamped by indeterminacy, and every reality is absorbed by the hyperreality of the code and simulation. The principle of simulation governs us now, rather than the outdated reality principle. We feed on those forms whose finalities have disappeared. No more ideology, only simulacra. We must therefore reconstruct the entire genealogy of the law of value and its simulacra in order to grasp the hegemony and the enchantment of the current system. A structural revolution of value. This genealogy must cover political economy, where it will appear as a sec- ond-order simulacrum, just like all those that stake everything on the real: the real of production, the real of signification, whether conscious or unconscious. Capital no longer belongs to the order of political economy: it operates with political economy as its simulated model. The entire apparatus of the commodity law of value is absorbed and recycled in the larger apparatus of the structural law of value, thus becoming part of the third order of simu- lacra (see below). Political economy is thus assured a second life, an eternity, within the confines of an apparatus in which it has lost all its strict deter- minacy, but maintains an effective presence as a system of reference for simulation. It was exactly the same for the previous apparatus – the natural law of value – which the system of political economy and the market law Symbolic Exchange and Death24 of value also appropriated as their imaginary system of reference (‘Nature’): ‘nature’ leads a ghostly existence as use-value at the core of exchange-value. But on the next twist of the spiral, use-value is seized as an alibi within the dominant order of the code. Each configuration of value is seized by the next in a higher order of simulacra. And each phase of value integrates the prior apparatus into its own as a phantom reference, a puppet reference, a simulated reference. A revolution separates each order from its successor: these are the only genuine revolutions. We are in the third order, which is the order no lon- ger of the real, but of the hyperreal. It is only here that theories and practices, themselves floating and indeterminate, can reach the real and beat it to death. Contemporary revolutions are indexed on the immediately prior state of the system. They are all buttressed by a nostalgia for the resur- rection of the real in all its forms, that is, as second-order simulacra: dialectics, use-value, the transparency and finality of production, the ‘liberation’ of the unconscious, of repressed meaning (the signifier, or the signified named ‘desire’), and so on. All these liberations provide the ideal content for the system to devour in its successive revolutions, and which it brings subtly back to life as mere phantasmas of revolution. These revolutions are only transitions towards generalised manipulation. At the stage of the aleatory processes of control, even revolution becomes meaningless. The rational, referential, historical and functional machines of con- sciousness correspond to industrial machines. The aleatory, non-referential, transferential, indeterminate and floating machines of the unconscious respond to the aleatory machines of the code. But even the unconscious is reabsorbed by this operation, and it has long since lost its own reality principle to become an operational simulacrum. At the precise point that its psychical reality principle merges into its psychoanalytic reality princi- ple, the unconscious, like political economy, also becomes a model of simulation. The systemic strategy is merely to invoke a number of floating values in this hyperreality. This is as true of the unconscious as it is of money and theories. Value rules according to the indiscernible order of generation by means of models, according to the infinite chains of simulation. Cybernetic operativity, the genetic code, the aleatory order of muta- tion, the uncertainty principle, etc., succeed determinate, objectivist science, and the dialectical view of history and consciousness. Even critical theory, along with the revolution, turns into a second-order sim- ulacrum, as do all determinate processes. The deployment of third-order simulacra sweeps all this away, and to attempt to reinstate dialectics, ‘objective’ contradictions, and so on, against them would be a futile political regression. You can’t fight the aleatory by imposing finalities, 25Preface you can’t fight against programmed and molecular dispersion with prises de conscience and dialectical sublation, you can’t fight the code with political economy, nor with ‘revolution’. All these outdated weapons (including those we find in first-order simulacra, in the ethics and meta- physics of man and nature, use-value, and other liberatory systems of reference) are gradually neutralised by a higher-order general system. Everything that filters into the non-finality of the space-time of the code, or that attempts to intervene in it, is disconnected from its own ends, disintegrated and absorbed. This is the well known effect of recu- peration, manipulation, of circulating and recycling at every level. ‘All dissent must be of a higher logical type than that to which it is opposed’ (Anthony Wilden, System and Structure [London: Tavistock, 1977], p. xxvii). Is it at least possible to find an even match to oppose third-order simulacra? Is there a theory or a practice which is subversive because it is more aleatory than the system itself, an indeterminate sub- version which would be to the order of the code what the revolution was to the order of political economy? Can we fight DNA? Certainly not by means of the class struggle. Perhaps simulacra of a higher logical (or illogical) order could be invented: beyond the current third order, beyond determinacy and indeterminacy. But would they still be simula- cra? Perhaps death and death alone, the reversibility of death, belongs to a higher order than the code. Only symbolic disorder can bring about an interruption in the code. Every system that approaches perfect operativity simultaneously approaches its downfall. When the system says ‘A is A’, or ‘two times two equals four’, it approaches absolute power and total absurdity; that is, immediate and probable subversion. A gentle push in the right place is enough to bring it crashing down. We know the potential of tautol- ogy when it reinforces the system’s claim to perfect sphericity (Ubu Roi’s belly). Identity is untenable: it is death, since it fails to inscribe its own death. Every closed or metastable, functional or cybernetic system is shadowed by mockery and instantaneous subversion (which no longer takes the detour through long dialectical labour), because all the system’s inertia acts against it. Ambivalence awaits the most advanced systems, that, like Leibniz’s binary God, have deified their functional principle. The fascina- tion they exert, because it derives from a profound denial such as we find in fetishism, can be instantaneously reversed. Hence their fragility increases in proportion to their ideal coherence. These systems, even when they are based on radical indeterminacy (the loss of meaning), fall prey, once more, to meaning. They collapse under the weight of their own monstrosity, like fossilised dinosaurs, and immediately decompose. This is the fatality of every system committed by its own logic to total perfection and therefore to a total defectiveness, to absolute infallibility and therefore irrevocable Symbolic Exchange and Death26 breakdown: the aim of all bound energies is their own death. This is why the only strategy is catastrophic, and not dialectical at all. Things must be pushed to the limit, where quite naturally they collapse and are inverted. At the peak of value we are closest to ambivalence, at the pinnacle of coherence we are closest to the abyss of corruption which haunts the redu- plicated signs of the code. Simulation must go further than the system. Death must be played against death: a radical tautology that makes the system’s own logic the ultimate weapon. The only strategy against the hyperrealist system is some form of pataphysics, ‘a science of imaginary solutions’; that is, a science-fiction of the system’s reversal against itself at the extreme limit of simulation, a reversible simulation in a hyperlogic of death and destruction. 1 The symbolic demands meticulous reversibility. Ex-terminate every term, abolish value in the term’s revolution against itself: that is the only sym- bolic violence equivalent to and triumphant over the structural violence of the code. A revolutionary dialectic corresponded to the commodity law of value and its equivalents; only the scrupulous reversion of death corresponds to the code’s indeterminacy and the structural law of value.2 Strictly speaking, nothing remains for us to base anything on. All that remains for us is theoretical violence – speculation to the death, whose only method is the radicalisation of hypotheses. Even the code and the symbolic remain terms of simulation: it must be possible to extract them, one by one, from discourse. Notes 1. Death is always equally what waits at the term of the system, and the symbolic exter- mination that stalks the system itself. It is not that there are two words to designate the finality of death internal to the system, the one in-scribed everywhere in its oper- ational logic, and the other a radical counter-finality ex-scribed on the system as such, but which haunts it everywhere: only the term of death, and it alone, figures on both sides. This ambiguity can already be discerned in the Freudian death-drive. Rather than an ambiguity, however, it simply translates the proximity of complete perfection and immediate defectiveness. 2. Death ought never to be understood as the real event that affects a subject or a body, but as a form in which the determinacy of the subject and of value is lost. The demand of reversibility puts an end to determinacy and indeterminacy at the same time. It puts an end to bound energies in stable oppositions, and is therefore in substantial agree- ment with theories of flows and intensities, whether libidinal or schizo. The unbinding of energies is, however, the very form of the current system, which consists in a stra- tegic drift of value. The system can be connected and disconnected, but all the freed energies will one day return to it: this is how the concepts of energy and intensity come about. Capital is an energetic and intense system. Hence the impossibility of distinguishing the libidinal economy from the political economy (see Jean-François Lyotard, Libidinal Economy [tr. I.H. Grant, London: Athlone, 1992]) of the system 27Preface of value; and the impossibility of distinguishing capitalist schizzes from revolution- ary schizzes (see Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia I [tr. R. Hurley, M. Seem and H.R. Lane, London: Athlone, 1984]). For the system is master: like God it can bind or unbind energies; what it is incapable of (and what it can no longer avoid) is reversibility. Reversibility alone therefore, rather than unbinding or drifting, is fatal to it. This is exactly what the term symbolic ‘exchange’ means. 1 The End of Production The Structural Revolution of Value Saussure located two dimensions to the exchange of terms of the langue, which he assimilated to money. A given coin must be exchangeable against a real good of some value, while on the other hand it must be possible to relate it to all the other terms in the monetary system. More and more, Saussure reserves the term value for this second aspect of the system: every term can be related to every other, their relativity, internal to the system and constituted by binary oppositions. This definition is opposed to the other possible definition of value: the relation of every term to what it des- ignates, of each signifier to its signified, like the relation of every coin with what it can be exchanged against. The first aspect corresponds to the struc- tural dimension of language, the second to its functional dimension. Each dimension is separate but linked, which is to say that they mesh and cohere. This coherence is characteristic of the ‘classical’ configuration of the lin- guistic sign, under the rule of the commodity law of value, where designa- tion always appears as the finality of the structural operation of the langue. The parallel between this ‘classical’ stage of signification and the mechanics of value in material production is absolute, as in Marx’s analysis: use-value plays the role of the horizon and finality of the system of exchange-values. The first qualifies the concrete operation of the commodity in consumption (a moment parallel to designation in the sign), the second relates to the exchangeability of any commodity for any other under the law of equiva- lence (a moment parallel to the structural organisation of the sign). Both are dialectically linked throughout Marx’s analyses and define a rational configuration of production, governed by political economy. A revolution has put an end to this ‘classical’ economics of value, a rev- olution of value itself, which carries value beyond its commodity form into its radical form. This revolution consists in the dislocation of the two aspects of the law of value, which were thought to be coherent and eternally bound as if by a natural law. Referential value is annihilated, giving the structural play of value the upper hand. The structural dimension becomes autonomous by exclud- ing the referential dimension, and is instituted upon the death of reference. The systems of reference for production, signification, the affect, substance and history, all this equivalence to a ‘real’ content, loading the sign with the burden of ‘utility’, with gravity – its form of representative equivalence – all this is over with. Now the other stage of value has the upper hand, a total 29 The End of Production relativity, general commutation, combination and simulation – simulation, in the sense that, from now on, signs are exchanged against each other rather than against the real (it is not that they just happen to be exchanged against each other, they do so on condition that they are no longer exchanged against the real). The emancipation of the sign: remove this ‘archaic’ obli- gation to designate something and it finally becomes free, indifferent and totally indeterminate, in the structural or combinatory play which succeeds the previous rule of determinate equivalence. The same operation takes place at the level of labour power and the production process: the annihi- lation of any goal as regards the contents of production allows the latter to function as a code, and the monetary sign, for example, to escape into infinite speculation, beyond all reference to a real of production, or even to a gold-standard. The flotation of money and signs, the flotation of ‘needs’ and ends of production, the flotation of labour itself – the commutability of every term is accompanied by speculation and a limitless inflation (and we really have total liberty – no duties, disaffection and general disenchant- ment; but this remains a magic, a sort of magical obligation which keeps the sign chained up to the real, capital has freed signs from this ‘naïvety’ in order to deliver them into pure circulation). Neither Saussure nor Marx had any presentiment of all this: they were still in the golden age of the dialectic of the sign and the real, which is at the same time the ‘classical’ period of capital and value. Their dialectic is in shreds, and the real has died of the shock of value acquiring this fantastic autonomy. Determinacy is dead, indeterminacy holds sway. There has been an extermination (in the literal sense of the word) of the real of production and the real of signification.1 I indicated this structural revolution of the law of value in the term ‘political economy of the sign’. 2 This term, however, can only be regarded as makeshift, for the following reasons: 1. Does this remain a political-economic question? Yes, in that it is always a question of value and the law of value. However, the mutation that affects it is so profound and so decisive, the content of political economy so thoroughly changed, indeed annihilated, that the term is nothing more than an allusion. Moreover, it is precisely political to the extent that it is always the destruction of social relations governed by the relevant value. For a long time, however, it has been a matter of something entirely different from economics. 2. The term ‘sign’ has itself only an allusive value. Since the structural law of value affects signification as much as it does everything else, its form is not that of the sign in general, but that of a certain organisation which is that of the code. The code only governs certain signs however. Just as the commodity law of value does not, at a given moment, signify just any determinant instance of material production, neither, con- versely, does the structural law of value signify any pre-eminence of the sign whatever. This illusion derives from the fact that Marx developed the one in the shadow of the commodity, while Saussure developed the Symbolic Exchange and Death30 other in the shadow of the linguistic sign. But this illusion must be shattered. The commodity law of value is a law of equivalences, and this law operates throughout every sphere: it equally designates the equivalence in the configuration of the sign, where one signifier and one signified facilitate the regulated exchange of a referential content (the other parallel modality being the linearity of the signifier, contem- poraneous with the linear and cumulative time of production). The classical law of value then operates simultaneously in every instance (language, production, etc.), despite these latter remaining distinct according to their sphere of reference. Conversely, the structural law of value signifies the indeterminacy of every sphere in relation to every other, and to their proper content (also therefore the passage from the determinant sphere of signs to the indeter- minacy of the code). To say that the sphere of material production and that of signs exchange their respective contents is still too wide of the mark: they literally disappear as such and lose their specificity along with their determinacy, to the benefit of a form of value, of a much more general assemblage, where designation and production are annihilated. The ‘political economy of the sign’ was also consequent upon an exten- sion of the commodity law of value and its confirmation at the level of signs, whereas the structural configuration of value simply and simultane- ously puts an end to the regimes of production, political economy, representation and signs. With the code, all this collapses into simulation. Strictly speaking, neither the ‘classical’ economy nor the political economy of the sign ceases to exist: they lead a secondary existence, becoming a sort of phantom principle of dissuasion. The end of labour. The end of production. The end of political economy. The end of the signifier/signified dialectic which facilitates the accumula- tion of knowledge and meaning, the linear syntagma of cumulative discourse. And at the same time, the end of the exchange-value/use-value dialectic which is the only thing that makes accumulation and social pro- duction possible. The end of the linear dimension of discourse. The end of the linear dimension of the commodity. The end of the classical era of the sign. The end of the era of production. It is not the revolution which puts an end to all this, it is capital itself which abolishes the determination of the social according to the means of production, substitutes the structural form for the commodity form of value, and currently controls every aspect of the system’s strategy. This historical and social mutation is legible at every level. In this way the era of simulation is announced everywhere by the commutability of formerly contradictory or dialectically opposed terms. Everywhere we see the same ‘genesis of simulacra’: the commutability of the beautiful and the ugly in fashion, of the left and the right in politics, of the true and the false in every media message, the useful and the useless at the level of objects, nature and culture at every level of signification. All the great 31 The End of Production humanist criteria of value, the whole civilisation of moral, aesthetic and practical judgement are effaced in our system of images and signs. Everything becomes undecidable, the characteristic effect of the domina- tion of the code, which everywhere rests on the principle of neutralisation, of indifference. 3 This is the generalised brothel of capital, a brothel not for prostitution, but for substitution and commutation. This process, which has for a long time been at work in culture, art, politics, and even in sexuality (in the so-called ‘superstructural’ domains), today affects the economy itself, the whole so-called ‘infrastructural’ field. Here the same indeterminacy holds sway. And, of course, with the loss of determination of the economic, we also lose any possibility of conceiving it as the determinant agency. Since for two centuries historical determination has been built up around the economic (since Marx in any case), it is there that it is important to grasp the interruption of the code. The End of Production We are at the end of production. In the West, this form coincides with the proclamation of the commodity law of value, that is to say, with the reign of political economy. First, nothing is produced, strictly speaking: every- thing is deduced, from the grace (God) or beneficence (nature) of an agency which releases or withholds its riches. Value emanates from the reign of divine or natural qualities (which for us have become retrospec- tively confused). The Physiocrats still saw the cycles of land and labour in this way, as having no value of their own. We may wonder, then, whether there is a genuine law of value, since this law is dispatch without attaining rational expression. Its form cannot be separated from the inexhaustible referential substance to which it is bound. If there is a law here, it is, in contrast to the commodity law, a natural law of value. A mutation shakes this edifice of a natural distribution or dispensing of wealth as soon as value is produced, as its reference becomes labour, and its law of equivalence is generalised to every type of labour. Value is now assigned to the distinct and rational operation of human (social) labour. It is measurable, and, in consequence, so is surplus-value. The critique of political economy begins with social production or the mode of production as its reference. The concept of production alone allows us, by means of an analysis of that unique commodity called labour power, to extract a surplus (a surplus-value) which controls the rational dynamics of capital as well as its beyond, the revolution. Today everything has changed again. Production, the commodity form, labour power, equivalence and surplus-value, which together formed the outline of a quantitative, material and measurable configuration, are now things of the past. Productive forces outlined another reference which, although in contradiction with the relations of production, remained a Symbolic Exchange and Death32 reference, that of social wealth. An aspect of production still supports both a social form called capital and its internal critique called Marxism. Now, revolutionary demands are based on the abolition of the commodity law of value. Now we have passed from the commodity law of value to the structural law of value, and this coincides with the obliteration of the social form known as production. Given this, are we still within a capitalist mode? It may be that we are in a hyper-capitalist mode, or in a very different order. Is the form of capital bound to the law of value in general, or to some specific form of the law of value (perhaps we are really already within a socialist mode? Perhaps this metamorphosis of capital under the sign of the struc- tural law of value is merely its socialist outcome? Oh dear …)? If the life and death of capital are staked on the commodity law of value, if the revolution is staked on the mode of production, then we are within neither capital nor revolution. If this latter consists in a liberation of the social and generic pro- duction of man, then there is no longer any prospect of a revolution since there is no more production. If, on the other hand, capital is a mode of dom- ination, then we are always in its midst. This is because the structural law of value is the purest, most illegible form of social domination, like sur- plus-value. It no longer has any references within a dominant class or a relation of forces, it works without violence, entirely reabsorbed without any trace of bloodshed into the signs which surround us, operative everywhere in the code in which capital finally holds its purest discourses, beyond the dialects of industry, trade and finance, beyond the dialects of class which it held in its ‘productive’ phase – a symbolic violence inscribed everywhere in signs, even in the signs of the revolution. The structural revolution of value eliminated the basis of the ‘Revolution’. The loss of reference fatally affected first the revolutionary systems of ref- erence, which can no longer be found in any social substance of production, nor in the certainty of a reversal in any truth of labour power. This is because labour is not a power, it has become one sign amongst many. Like every other sign, it produces and consumes itself. It is exchanged against non-labour, leisure, in accordance with a total equivalence, it is commutable with every other sector of everyday life. No more or less ‘alienated’, it is no longer a unique, historical ‘praxis’ giving rise to unique social relations. Like most practices, it is now only a set of signing operations. It becomes part of contemporary life in general, that is, it is framed by signs. It is no longer even the suffering of historical prostitution which used to play the role of the contrary promise of final emancipation (or, as in Lyotard, as the space of the workers’ enjoyment [jouissance] which fulfils an unremitting desire in the abjection of value and the rule of capital). 4 None of this remains true. Sign-form seizes labour and rids it of every historical or libidinal signifi- cance, and absorbs it in the process of its own reproduction: the operation of the sign, behind the empty allusion to what it designates, is to replicate itself. In the past, labour was used to designate the reality of a social pro- duction and a social objective of accumulating wealth. Even capital and 33 The End of Production surplus-value exploited it – precisely where it retained a use-value for the expanded reproduction of capital and its final destruction. It was shot through with finality anyway – if the worker is absorbed in the pure and simple reproduction of his labour power, it is not true that the process of production is experienced as senseless repetition. Labour revolutionises society through its very abjection, as a commodity whose potential always exceeds pure and simple reproduction of value. Today this is no longer the case since labour is no longer productive but has become reproductive of the assignation to labour which is the general habit of a society which no longer knows whether or not it wishes to produce. No more myths of production and no more contents of production: national balance sheets now merely retrace a numerical and statistical growth devoid of meaning, an inflation of the signs of accountancy over which we can no longer even project the phantasy of the collective will. The pathos of growth itself is dead, since no-one believes any longer in the pathos of production, whose final, paranoid and panic-stricken tumescence it was. Today these codes are detumescent. It remains, however, more necessary than ever to reproduce labour as a social ritual [affectation], as a reflex, as morality, as consensus, as regulation, as the reality principle. The reality principle of the code, that is: an immense ritual of the signs of labour extends over society in general – since it reproduces itself, it matters little whether or not it produces. It is much more effective to socialise by means of rituals and signs than by the bound energies of production. You are asked only to become socialised, not to produce or to excel yourself (this classical ethic now arouses suspicion instead). You are asked only to consider value, according to the structural definition which here takes on its full social significance, as one term in rela- tion to others, to function as a sign in the general scenario of production, just as labour and production now function only as signs, as terms commutable with non-labour, consumption, communication, etc. – a multiple, incessant, twisting relation across the entire network of other signs. Labour, once voided of its energy and substance (and generally disinvested), is given a new role as the model of social simulation, bringing all the other categories along with it into the aleatory sphere of the code. An unnervingly strange state of affairs: this sudden plunge into a sort of secondary existence, separated from you by all the opacity of a previous life, where there was a familiarity and an intimacy in the traditional pro- cess of labour. Even the concrete reality of exploitation, the violent sociality of labour, is familiar. This has all gone now, and is due not so much to the operative abstraction of the process of labour, so often described, as to the passage of every signification of labour into an opera- tional field where it becomes a floating variable, dragging the whole imaginary of a previous life along with it. Beyond the autonomisation of production as mode (beyond the con- vulsions, contradictions and revolutions inherent in the mode), the code of production must re-emerge. This is the dimension things are taking on today, at the end of a ‘materialist’ history which has succeeded in Symbolic Exchange and Death34 authenticating it as the real movement of society. (Art, religion and duty have no real history for Marx – only production has a history, or, rather, it is history, it grounds history. An incredible fabrication of labour and production as historical reason and the generic model of fulfilment.) The end of this religious autonomisation of production allows us to see that all of this could equally have been produced (this time in the sense of a stage-production and a scenario) fairly recently, with totally different goals than the internal finalities (that is, the revolution) secreted away within production. To analyse production as a code cuts across both the material evidence of machines, factories, labour time, the product, salaries and money, and the more formal, but equally ‘objective’, evidence of surplus-value, the market, capital, to discover the rule of the game which is to destroy the logical network of the agencies of capital, and even the critical network of the Marxian categories which analyse it (which categories are again only an appearance at the second degree of capital, its critical appearance), in order to discover the elementary signifiers of production, the social rela- tions it establishes, buried away forever beneath the historical illusion of the producers (and the theoreticians). Labour Labour power is not a ‘power’, it is a definition, an axiom, and its ‘real’ operation in the labour process, its ‘use-value’, is only the reduplication of this definition in the operation of the code. It is at the level of the sign, never at the level of energy, that violence is fundamental. The mechanism of capital (and not its law) plays on surplus-value – the non-equivalence of the salary and labour power. Even if the two were equivalent, even if sala- ries were abolished (for the sale of labour power), man would still be marked by this axiom, by this destiny of production, by this sacrament of labour which sets him apart like a sex. The worker is no longer a man, nor even a woman: it has its own sex, it is assigned this labour power as an end, and marked by it as a woman is marked by her sex (her sexual definition), as a Black is by the colour of his or her skin – all signs and nothing but signs. We must distinguish what belongs to the mode and what belongs to the code of production. Before becoming an element of the commodity law of value, labour power is initially a status, a structure of obedience to a code. Before becoming exchange-value or use-value, it is already, like any other commodity, the sign of the operation of nature as value, which defines production and is the basic axiom of our culture and no other. This mes- sage, much more profoundly than quantitative equivalences, runs beneath commodities from the outset: to remove indeterminacy from nature (and man) in order to submit it to the determinacy of value. This is confirmed in the constructionist mania for bulldozers, motorways, ‘infrastructures’, and in the civilising mania of the era of production, a mania for leaving no fragment unproduced, for countersigning everything with production, 35 The End of Production without even the hope of an excess of wealth. Producing in order to mark, producing in order to reproduce the marked man. What is production today apart from this terrorism of the code? This is as clear for us as it was for the first industrial generations, who dealt with machines as with an absolute enemy, harbingers of total destructuration, before the comforting dream of a historical dialectic of production developed. The Luddite prac- tices which arose everywhere to some extent, the savagery of attacking the instrument of production (primarily attacking itself as the productive force), endemic sabotage and defection bear lengthy testimony to the fra- gility of the productive order. Smashing machines is an aberrant act if they are the means of production, if any ambiguity remains over their future use-value. If, however, the ends of this production collapse, then the respect due to the means of production also collapses, and the machines appear as their true end, as direct and immediate operational signs of the social relation to death on which capital is nourished. Nothing then stands in the way of their destruction. In this sense, the Luddites were much clearer than Marx on the impact of the irruption of the industrial order, and today, at the catastrophic end of this process, to which Marx himself has misled us in the dialectical euphoria of productive forces, they have in some sense exacted their revenge. We do not mean to invoke the prestige that may attach to a particular type of labour when we say that labour is a sign, nor even the sense of improvement signified by wage labour for the Algerian immigrant in rela- tion to his tribal community, or for the Moroccan kid from the High Atlas Mountains whose only dream is to work for Simca, or for women in our own society. In this case, labour refers to a strict value: betterment or a different status. On the contemporary stage, labour no longer emerges from this referential definition of the sign. There is no longer any proper signifi- cation of a particular type of labour or of labour in general, but a system of labour where jobs are exchanged. No more ‘right man in the right place’,5 an old adage of the scientific idealism of production. There are no more interchangeable but indispensable individuals in a determinate labour pro- cess, since the labour process itself has become interchangeable: mobile, polyvalent and intermittent structures of absorption, indifferent to every object and even to labour itself, when understood according to its classical operation and applied solely to localise each individual within a social nexus where nothing converges except perhaps within the immanence of this operational matrix, an indifferent paradigm which identifies every indi- vidual according to a shared radical, or a syntagma which links them into an indefinite combinatory mode. Labour (even in the guise of leisure), like a primary repression, per- vades every aspect of life in the form of a control, a permanent occupation of spaces and times regulated according to an omnipresent code. Wherever there are people, they must be fixed, whether in schools, fac- tories, on the beach, in front of the TV, or being retrained. Generalised and permanent mobilisation. Such labour is not, however, productive in Symbolic Exchange and Death36 the sense of ‘original’: it is nothing more than the mirror of society, its imaginary, its fantastic reality principle. Perhaps its death drive. This is the tendency of every current strategy that turns around labour: ‘job enrichment,’6 flexitime, mobility, retraining, continuing education, autonomy, worker-management, decentralisation of the labour process, even the Californian utopia of domestic cybernetics. Your quotidian roots are no longer savagely ripped up in order to hand you over to the machine – you, your childhood, your habits, your relationships, your unconscious drives, and even your refusal to work are integrated into it. You will easily find a place for yourself amongst all of this, a personalised job, or, failing that, there is a welfare provision calculated according to your personal needs. In any case, you will no longer be abandoned, since it is essential that everyone be a terminal for the entire system, an insignificant terminal, but a term none the less – not an inarticulate cry, but a term of the langue and at the terminus of the entire structural network of the language. The very choice of work, the utopia of a tailor-made job, signifies that the die is cast, that the structure of absorption is total. Labour power is no longer brutally bought and sold, it is designed, marketed and turned into a commodity – production re-enters the sign system of consumption. An initial step of this analysis was to conceive the sphere of consumption as an extension of the sphere of the forces of production. We must now do the reverse. The entire sphere of production, labour and the forces of pro- duction must be conceived as collapsing into the sphere of ‘consumption’, understood as the sphere of a generalised axiomatic, a coded exchange of signs, a general lifestyle. In this way knowledge, the sciences, attitudes (D. Verres, Le discours du capitalisme [Paris: L’herne, 1971], p. 36: ‘Why not consider the attitudes of the workforce as one of the resources to be man- aged by the boss?’), but also sexuality and the body, the imagination (ibid., p. 74: ‘The imagination is all that remains bound to the pleasure principle, whereas the psychical apparatus is subordinated to the reality principle’ (Freud). We must put a stop to this waste. The imagination should be real- ised as a force of production, it should be invested. The slogan of technocracy is: ‘Power to the Imagination!’). The same goes for the uncon- scious, the revolution, and so on. True, all this is in the process of being ‘invested’ and absorbed into the sphere of value, but not so much market value as accountable value; that is, it is not mobilised for the sake of pro- duction, but indexed, allocated, summoned to play the part of a functional variable. It has become not so much a force of production as several pieces on the chessboard of the code, caught in the same game-rules. The axiom of production now tends to be reduced to factors, the axiom of the code reduces everything to a variable. One leads to equations and balance sheets of forces, and the other tends towards mobile and aleatory sets, which neu- tralise whatever escapes or resists them by connection and not by annexation. This goes much further than Taylorism, or the Scientific Organisation of Labour (SOL), but its spectre marks an essential milestone of investment by the code. Two phases can be distinguished. 37 The End of Production The ‘pre-scientific’ phase of the industrial system, characterised by max- imum exploitation of labour power, is succeeded by the phase of machinery and the preponderance of fixed capital, where ‘objectified labour appears not only in the form of product, or of the product employed as the means of labour, but in the form of the force of production itself (Marx, Grundrisse [tr. Martin Nicolaus, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973], p. 694). This accu- mulation of objectified labour which supplants living labour as a force of production is subsequently multiplied to infinity by the accumulation of knowledge: ‘The accumulation of knowledge and of skill, of the general productive forces of the social brain, is thus absorbed into capital, as opposed to labour, and hence appears as an attribute of capital, and more specifically of fixed capital’ (ibid., p. 694). In the phase of machinery, the scientific apparatus, the collective labourer and the SOL, the ‘production process has ceased to be a labour process in the sense of a process dominated by labour as its governing unity’ (ibid., p. 693). There is no longer any ‘original’ force of production, only a general machinery transforming the forces of production into capital; or, rather, a machinery which manufactures both the force of production and labour power. The whole social apparatus of labour is forestalled by this operation. The collective machinery has begun to produce social goals directly, and this is what produces production. The hegemony of dead labour over living labour. Primitive accumulation merely accumulates dead labour to the point that it can reabsorb living labour. Or, in other words, it becomes capable of controlling the production of living labour for its own ends. This is why the end of primitive accumu- lation marks the decisive turning point of political economy: the transition to the preponderance of dead labour, to crystallised social relations incar- nated in dead labour, weighing down on society in its entirety as the code of domination itself. Marx’s greatest error was to have retained a belief in the innocence of machines, the technical process and science – all of which were supposedly capable of becoming living social labour once the system of capital was liquidated, despite the fact that this is precisely what the system is based on. This pious hope springs from having underestimated death in dead labour, and from thinking that death is overcome in the living, beyond a certain crucial point, by a sort of historical somersault of production. Marx had, however, sensed this while noting that ‘objectified labour confronts living labour within the process itself as the power which rules it; a power which, as the appropriation of living labour, is the form of capital’ (Grundrisse, p. 693 [J.B.’s emphasis]). This also becomes apparent in the formula according to which, at a certain stage of capital, man ‘steps to the side of the production process, instead of being its chief actor’ (ibid., p. 705). This formula goes well beyond political economy and its critique, since it literally signifies that it is a matter no longer of a production process, but of a process of exclusion and relegation. We must again draw out all the consequences of this. When produc- tion attains this circularity and turns in on itself, it loses every objective Symbolic Exchange and Death38 determination. It incants itself as myth while its own terms have become signs. Simultaneously, when this sphere of signs (including the media, infor- mation, etc.) ceases to be a specific sphere for representing the unity of the global process of capital, then we must not only say with Marx that ‘the production process has ceased to be a labour process’ (ibid., p. 693), but that ‘the process of capital itself has ceased to be a production process’. With the hegemony of dead labour over living labour, the whole dialectic of production collapses. Following the same basic schema as the central oppositions of rationalist thought (truth and falsity, appearance and reality, nature and culture), all the oppositions according to which Marxism operates (use-value/exchange-value, forces of production/relations of production) are also neutralised, and in the same way. Everything within production and the economy becomes commutable, reversible and exchangeable according to the same indeterminate specularity as we find in politics, fashion or the media. The indeterminate specularity of the forces and relations of produc- tion, of capital and labour, use-value and exchange-value, constitutes the dissolution of production into the code. Today the law of value no longer lies so much in the exchangeability of every commodity under the sign of a gen- eral equivalent, as it does in a much more radical exchangeability of all the categories of political economy (and its critique) in accordance with the code. All the determinations of ‘bourgeois’ thought were neutralised and abolished by the materialist thought of production, which has brought everything down to a single great historical determination. In its turn, however, this too is neutralised and absorbed by a revolution of the terms of the system. Just as other generations were able to dream of pre-capitalist society, we have begun to dream of political economy as a lost object. Now, even its discourse carries some referential force only because it is a lost object. Marx: On the whole, types of work that are consumed as services and not as prod- ucts separable from the worker hence not capable of existing as commodities independently of him … are of microscopic significance when compared with the mass of capitalist production. They may be entirely neglected, therefore, and can be dealt with under the category of wage-labour. (Capital [tr. Ben Fowkes, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 1976], Vol. 1, pp. 1044–5) This chapter of Capital was never written: the problem posed by this disjunction, which confirms that between productive and unproductive labour, is utterly insoluble. Every Marxist definition of labour is split, but this was happening from the outset. In the Grundrisse, Marx says: ‘Labour becomes productive only by producing its own opposite [that is, capital]’ (p. 305n), from which we may logically conclude that if labour comes to reproduce itself, as is the case today within the compass of the ‘collective labourer’, it ceases to be productive. This is the unforeseen consequence of a definition which did not even consider that capital might take root in something other than the ‘productive’, precisely, perhaps, in labour voided of its productivity, in ‘unproductive’ labour, somehow neutralised, where capital simply eludes the dangerous determinacy of ‘productive’ 39 The End of Production labour and can begin to establish its total domination. By misunderstand- ing ‘unproductive labour’, Marx concedes the real undefined character of labour on which the strategy of capital is based. ‘Production for unproductive consumption is quite as productive as that for productive consumption; always assuming that it produces or reproduces capital’ (Grundrisse, p. 306n). According to Marx’s own defini- tion, there is a paradox here which results from an increasing sector of human labour becoming unproductive without apparently preventing capital from consolidating its dominance. In fact, however, this is all rigged in advance – there are not two or three types of labour, 7 capital itself whis- pered these pedantic distinctions to Marx, while never being stupid enough to believe in them itself, always merely ‘naïvely’ overlooking them. There is only one sort of labour (a fundamental definition in fact), and as luck would have it this is the one that Marx let slip through his fingers. Today all labour falls under a single definition, that bastard, archaic and unanalysed category of service-labour, and not the supposedly universal classical definition of ‘proletarian’ wage-labour. This is not service-labour in the feudal sense, since labour has lost the sense of obligation and reciprocity that it had in the feudal context, but in the sense that Marx indicates: in service, prestation is inseparable from the prestator – an archaic aspect in the productivist vision of capital, but one that’s fundamental if capital is grasped as a system of domination, as a system of ‘infeudation’ to a labouring society, that is, to a certain type of political society for which labour is the rule of the game. This is where we are (if we weren’t already there in Marx’s time): the reduction of every labour to a service, labour as pure and simple presence/occupation, consumption of time, prestation of time. We make an ‘act’ of labour as we make an act of presence or an act of allegiance. In this sense, prestation is in fact inseparable from the prestator. The service rendered conjoins the body, time, space and grey matter. Whether this pro- duces or not is a matter of indifference as regards this personal indexation. Surplus-value disappears, of course, and the meaning of wages changes (we will come back to this later). It is not, however, a ‘regression’ of capital towards feudalism, but rather the dawn of its real domination, solicitation and total conscription of the ‘person’. This is the tendency of every effort to ‘retotalise’ labour, making it into a total service where the prestator may be more or less absent, but increasingly personally involved. In this sense labour can no longer be distinguished from other activities, particularly from its opposing term of free time, which, because it implies the same mobilisation and the same investment (or the same productive disinvestment), is today just as much a service rendered, 8 which, in accor- dance with any standard of justice, should merit a wage (this is not absolutely impossible). 9 In short, it is not only the imaginary distinction between productive and unproductive labour which is shaken up, but also the distinction between work and rest itself. There is quite simply no more labour in the specific sense of the term, so Marx ultimately did well not to write his chapter of Capital: it was condemned from the outset. Symbolic Exchange and Death40 It is at precisely this moment that workers become ‘agents of production’. This slippage of terminology – such things have their own importance – ironically signifies the status of one who produces nothing. The semi-skilled worker was no longer a labourer, but merely a worker facing the total indif- ferentiation of labour, no longer struggling over the content of labour nor over specific wages, but struggling over the generalised form of labour and the political wage. The formation of the ‘agent of production’ is accompa- nied by his liberation from the most abstract form – much more abstract than the old semi-skilled worker, exploited to death: the mannequin of labour appeared, the lowest common denominator, the dumb waiter of labour’s unreality principle. A pleasant euphemism: we no longer work, but merely perform ‘acts of production’. This is the end of production-culture, hence the a contrario appearance of the term ‘productive’. This ‘productive agent’ is no longer characterised by its exploitation, nor by its being raw material in a labour process; it is characterised by its mobility and interchangeability, by being an insignificant inflection of fixed capital. The ‘agent of production’ designates the ultimate status of Marx’s worker who, as he said, ‘steps to the side of the production process’. The current phase, where ‘the process of capital itself ceases to be a process of production’, is simultaneously the phase of the disappearance of the factory: society as a whole takes on the appearance of a factory. The factory must disappear as such, and labour must lose its specificity in order that capital can ensure the extensive metamorphosis of its form through- out society as a whole. We must therefore formally recognise the disappearance of the determinate sites of labour, a determinate subject of labour, a determinate time of social labour, we must formally recognise the disappearance of the factory, labour and the proletariat if we want to anal- yse capital’s current and real dominance. 10 The chain-store stage of society or the factory superstructure, the virtual reserve army of capital, is at an end. The principle of the factory and labour explodes and scatters over every aspect of society in such a way that the distinction between the two becomes ‘ideological’. It becomes one of capital’s traps for maintaining the factory’s specific and privileged presence in the revolutionary imaginary. Labour is everywhere, because there is no more labour. Labour now reaches its definitive, completed form, its principle, which supports and confirms the principles elaborated in the course of history in those other social spaces that preceded manufacturing industry and served as a model for it: the asylum, the ghetto, the general hospital, the prison – all the sites of enclosure and concentration that our culture has hidden in its march to civilisation. Today, all these determinate sites are themselves losing even their own limits, they are spread throughout global society since the asy- lum form, carceral form and discrimination have begun to invest the whole social space, every moment of real life. 11 All these things – factories, asy- lums, prisons, schools – still exist, and will no doubt continue to exist for an indefinite period, as warning signs, to divert the reality of the domina- tion of capital into an imaginary materiality. There have always been 41 The End of Production churches to hide the death of God, or to hide the fact that God was everywhere, which amounts to the same thing. There will always be animal reserves and Indian reservations to hide the fact that they are dead, and that we are all Indians. There will always be factories to hide the death of labour, the death of production, or the fact that they are everywhere and nowhere at once. For there is nothing with which to fight capital today in determinate forms. On the contrary, should it become clear that capital is no longer determined by something or other, and that its secret weapon is the reproduction of labour as imaginary, then capital itself would be close to exhaustion. Wages Labour, which in its completed form has no relation to any determinate production, is also without any equivalent in wages. Wages are equivalent to labour power only from the perspective of the quantitative reproduc- tion of labour power. When they become the sanction of the status of labour power, the sign of obedience to the rule of the game of capital, wages no longer possess any such meaning. They are no longer in any proportional or equivalence relation at all, 12 they are a sacrament, like a baptism (or the Extreme Unction), which turns you into a genuine citizen of the political society of capital. Beyond the economic investment which constitutes the worker’s wage-revenue for capital (end of the salariat as exploitation, beginning of the salariat as the ‘actionariat’ of capitalist society – the worker’s strategic function slides towards consumption as obligatory social service), it is the other sense of the term ‘investment’ which brings it into the current phase of wage-status: capital invested the worker with a wage just as one used to be invested with a charge or a responsibility. But capital also invested the worker as one might ‘invest’ a town, totally occupying it and controlling all access. 13 It is not solely by means of wage-revenue that capital charges produc- ers to keep money in circulation and thus to become real reproducers of capital, but more fundamentally by means of the wage-status by which they are turned into purchasers of goods in the same way that capital itself is the purchaser of labour. Every user uses consumer objects reduced to the functional status of the production of services, just as capital uses labour power. Everyone is thus invested with the fundamental mentality of capital. On the other hand, as soon as wages are detached from labour power, nothing (not even the unions) stands in the way of an unlimited and maximal wage demand. If there is a ‘right price’ for a certain quantity of labour force, a price can no longer be fixed on consensus and global participation. The traditional wage demand is only a negotiation over the producer’s conditions. The maximalist demand is an offensive form of the wage-earner’s reversal of his status as a reproducer, a status to which he is condemned by means of the wage. It is a challenge. The wage-earner Symbolic Exchange and Death42 wants everything. His method is not only to aggravate the economic crisis of the system but to turn every political constraint that the system imposes against it. The maximalist slogan runs: ‘maximum wage for minimum labour’. The political result of this escalating reversal might indeed be to send the system into orbit, in accordance with its own logic of labour as enforced presence. For wage-earners operate no longer as producers, but rather in terms of non-production, a role assigned them by capital. Neither do they operate dialectically, their interventions are catastrophic. The less there is to do, the more wage increases must be demanded, since the minimal job is a more obvious sign of an absurdity than that of enforced presence. This is the ‘class’ that capital transforms in its own image: even robbed of its exploitation, the use of its labour power, it couldn’t pay capital too much for this denial of production, this loss of identity, this debauchery. The exploited can demand only the minimum, but lower their status and they are free to demand everything. 14 The strik- ing thing about this is that capital can follow into these fields with relative ease. It is not too much for the unions to make those wage-earners without consciousness aware of the wage-labour equivalence which capital itself has abolished. It is not too much for the unions to channel this unlimited wage-blackmail into the wholesome straits of negotiation. Without the unions, the workers would immediately demand 50 per cent, 100 per cent or 200 per cent increases – and perhaps get them! There are examples of this in the United States and Japan. 15 Money The homology Saussure established between labour and the signified on the one hand, and wages and the signifier on the other, is a kind of matrix which can be used as a base from which to survey political economy in its entirety. Today, however, the contrary proves to be the case: signifiers are severed from signifieds and wages are severed from labour. The escalating play of the signifier parallels the escalation of wages. Saussure was right: political economy is a language [langue], and the same mutation that affects linguistic signs when they lose their referential status also affects the categories of political economy. The same process ramifies in two other directions. 1. Production is severed from every reference or social finality. It then enters a growth phase. We must not interpret this growth as an accel- eration, but in another sense, as something which marks and brings about the end of production. This is characterised by a significant diver- gence between production, on the one hand, and a relatively contingent and autonomous consumption, on the other. When, after the crisis of 1929, and especially after the Second World War, consumption began to be literally ‘planned’, that is, took on the force at once of a myth and 43 The End of Production of a controlled variable, we enter a phase where neither production nor consumption retains any proper determinations nor respective ends. Both become caught in a cycle or spiral, they are overcome by a con- fusion propagated by growth which leaves the traditional social objec- tives of production and consumption well behind. This process has only itself as an end. It no longer targets needs or profits. It is not an accel- eration of productivity, but a structural inflation of the signs of produc- tion, an oscillation and proliferation of every sign, including monetary signs. It is the era of rocket launching programmes, Concorde, and total war strategies, of the proliferation of industrial estates, social or individ- ual infrastructural facilities, training programmes and recycling, etc. – production for production’s sake in accordance with a constraint of reinvestment at any cost (reinvestment no longer operating as the rate of surplus-value). The crowning achievement of this reproductive planning promises to be anti-pollution measures, where the entire ‘productive’ system will recycle and therefore eliminate its own waste products. This huge equation adds up to zero; not nothing, however, because the dialectic of pollution and anti-pollution ‘produces’ inchoate aspirations to growth without end. 2. The monetary sign is severed from every social production and then enters a phase of speculation and limitless inflation. Inflation is to money what the escalation of wages is to the sale of labour power, and what growth is to production. In each case, the same split releases the same burst of frantic activity and the same virtual crisis: the splitting of wages and the ‘right price’ of labour power, and the splitting of money and real production, both result in the loss of a system of reference. Abstract social labour time on the one hand and the gold-standard on the other lose their function as indices and criteria of equivalence. Wage inflation and monetary inflation (as well as growth) are therefore of the same type and are inseparable.16 Purged of finalities and the affects of production, money becomes speculative. From the gold-standard, which had already ceased to be the representative equivalent of a real production but still retains traces of this in a certain equilibrium (little inflation, the convertibility of money into gold, etc.), to hot money and generalised flotation, money is trans- formed from a referential sign into its structural form – the ‘floating’ signifier’s own logic, not in Lévi-Strauss’s sense, where it has not yet dis- covered its signified, but in the sense that it is well rid of every signified (every ‘real’ equivalent) as a brake to its proliferation and its unlimited play. Money can thus be reproduced according to a simple play of trans- fers and writings, according to an incessant splitting and increase of its own abstract substance. Hot money: a name given to Euro-dollars, doubtless in order to char- acterise the senseless circulations of the monetary sign. Now, however, we should more accurately say that money has become ‘cool’, this term Symbolic Exchange and Death44 designating, following McLuhan and Riesman, an intense but non-affective relativity of terms, a play sustained purely by the rules of the game, the commutation of terms and the exhaustion of these commutations. By contrast, ‘hot’ characterises the referential phase of the sign, with its sin- gularity and the opacity of its signified in the real, its very powerful affect and its minimal commutability. We are right in the middle of the sign’s cool phase. The current system of labour is cool, every structural assem- blage is, generally speaking, cool, while both ‘classical’ production and labour, hot processes par excellence, have been replaced by unlimited growth bound to a disinvestment of the contents and process of labour, which are cool processes. Coolness is the pure play of the values of discourse and the commuta- tions of writing. It is the ease and aloofness of what now only really plays with codes, signs and words, the omnipotence of operational simulation. To whatever extent affects or systems of reference remain, they remain hot. Any ‘message’ keeps us in the hot. We enter the cool era when the medium becomes the message. And this is precisely what has taken place with money. Once a certain phase of disconnection has been reached, money is no longer a medium or a means to circulate commodities, it is circulation itself, that is to say, it is the realised form of the system in its twisting abstraction. Money is the first ‘commodity’ to assume the status of a sign and to escape use-value. Henceforth, it intensifies the system of exchange-value, turning it into a visible sign, and in this way makes the transparency of the market (and therefore of rarity too) visible. Today, however, money sanc- tions a further step: it also escapes exchange-value. Freed from the market itself, it becomes an autonomous simulacrum, relieved of every message and every signification of exchange, becoming a message itself and exchang- ing amongst itself. Money is then no longer a commodity since it no longer contains any use-value or exchange-value, nor is it any longer a general equivalent, that is, it is no longer a mediating abstraction of the market. Money circulates at a greater rate than everything else, and has no common measure with anything else. We could of course say that this has always been the case that since the first light shone on the market economy, money circulated at the highest rate and drew every other sector into this acceleration. And throughout the history of capital there is a distortion of all the different levels (finan- cial, industrial, agricultural, but also consumer goods, etc.) according to the speed at which it circulates. These distortions still persist today, as the resistance of national currencies (bound up with a market, a production and a local equilibrium) to international speculative currencies testifies. It is, however, the latter that is leading the offensive, because it is what cir- culates at the highest rate, it is what drifts and floats: a simple play of flotation can ruin any national economy. In accordance with a differential rate of rotation, every sector is thus directed by this high intensity flotation which, far from being a baroque, epiphenomenal process (‘What is the 45 The End of Production Stock Market for?’), is the purest expression of the system. We discover this scenario everywhere: in the inconvertibility of currencies into gold, or in the inconvertibility of signs into their systems of reference; in the float- ing and generalised convertibility of currencies amongst themselves, or in the mobility and the endless structural play of signs. But we also discover this in the flotation of all the categories of political economy once they lose their gold-reference, labour power and social production: labour and non-labour, labour and capital, become commutable, all logic has dis- solved; and we discover this in the flotation of all the categories of consciousness where the mental equivalent of the gold-standard, the subject, has been lost. There are no more authorities to which to refer, under whose jurisdiction producers could exchange their values in accordance with controlled equivalents: the end of the gold-standard. There are no more authorities to which to refer, under whose aegis a subject could exchange objects dialectically, or exchange their determinations around a stable identity in accordance with definite rules: the end of the conscious subject. (We are tempted to say that this is the reign of the unconscious.) The logical consequence of this is, if the conscious subject is the mental equivalent of the gold-standard, then the unconscious is the mental equiv- alent of speculative currency and hot money. Today, individuals, disinvested as subjects and robbed of their fixed relations, are drifting, in relation to one another, into an incessant mode of transferential fluctuations: flows, connections, disconnections, transference/counter-transference. Society as a whole could easily be described in terms of the Deleuzian unconscious, 17 or of monetary mechanics (or indeed in the Riesmanian terms of ‘other-directedness’, which is already, unfortunately in Anglo-Saxon and therefore barely schizophrenic terms, the flotation of identities). Why privilege the unconscious here (even if it is orphan and schizophrenic)? The unconscious is that mental structure contemporaneous with the most radi- cal, current phase of dominant exchange; it is contemporaneous with the structural revolution of value. Strikes Within a system of production, strikes were historically justified as organ- ised violence for purposes of snatching a fraction of surplus-value, or else power, from the opposing violence of capital. Today this form of the strike is dead: 1. It is dead because capital is in a position to leave every strike to con- tinue until it rots, precisely because we are no longer in a system of production (maximalisation of surplus-value). Profits be damned so long as the reproduction of the form of social relations is saved! 2. It is dead because such strikes change nothing fundamental: contempo- rary capital merely redistributes itself, a matter of life or death for it. At best, strikes merely snatch only what, in the end, capital would have conceded anyway. Symbolic Exchange and Death46 So if relations of production, and with them the class struggle, fall into orchestrated social and political relations, then clearly all that can intervene in this cycle is what escapes the organisation and definition of class as: − a representative historical agency; − a productive historical agency. Only those who escape the swings and roundabouts of production and rep- resentation can disrupt these mechanisms and provoke, from the depths of their blinded state, a return to the ‘class struggle’, which might indeed mark the end of this struggle as a locus within the ‘political’. It is here that the intervention of immigrants in recent strikes18 takes on meaning. Because millions of workers find themselves, by means of the mechan- ics of discrimination, deprived of all representative authority, their appearance on the Western stage of the class struggle carries the crisis of representation to a crucial level. Kept classless by society as a whole, including the unions (and, on this point, with the economic-racial com- plicity of their ‘rank and file’: for the organised proletarian ‘class’, centred on its relations with political-economic forces with the bourgeois capital- ist class, the immigrant is ‘objectively’ an enemy of the class), the immigrants play, through the action of this social exclusion, the role of analysts of the relation between workers and the unions, and, more gen- erally, of the relation between the ‘class’ and every representative authority of the ‘class’. They are deviant as regards the system of political representation and of every authority who claims to speak in their name. This situation will not last: unions and bosses have sensed the danger and have begun to reintegrate the immigrants as ‘temporary full citizens’, full- time extras on the stage of the ‘class struggle’. The Autopsy of the Unions The Renault strike of March–April 1973 con- stituted a general repetition of this crisis. Apparently confused, uncoordinated, manipulated and, in the final analysis, a failure (except for the extraordinary terminological victory that consisted in the replacement of the once taboo term ‘semi-skilled worker’ with the term ‘agent of production’!), this strike was in reality the beautiful swan song of the unions, caught between their rank and file and the bosses. From the outset it was a ‘savage’ strike, unleashed by semi-skilled immigrant workers. The CGT,19 however, had a weapon ready to counter this accidental war: namely spreading the strike to other factories or to other sectors of the workforce, thus taking advantage of the now ritual spring mass demonstrations. Yet even this mechanism of con- trol, which had been repeatedly tested ever since 1968, which the unions counted they could rely on for generations to come, let them down this time. Even the non-savage rank and file (at Seguin, Flins and Sandouville) were sometimes on strike and sometimes back at work (which is also important), without paying heed to the ‘advice’ from their unions. The unions were constantly being caught off-guard. The workers wanted nothing to do with whatever the unions won from management and put before them. 47 The End of Production Those concessions they drew from the workers in order to relaunch negoti- ations with management were rejected by the management, who then closed down the factories. Management appealed to the workers while ignoring the unions, and in fact deliberately forced the crisis in order to force the unions to retreat: couldn’t they control all the workers? The unions’ social legitimacy, and even their existence, was at issue. Hence the bosses’ (and all levels of government) adoption of a ‘hard line’. It was no longer a question of a test of strength between the organised (unionised) proletariat and the bosses, but of a test of representativity for the unions, under pressure from both the rank and file and management. Such tests result from every savage strike over the last few years sparked off by non-union personnel, rebellious youth, immigrants: the classless. The stakes at this level are extraordinary. The entire edifice of society threatens to collapse with the unions’ legitimacy and representativity. Adjudicators and other mediating bodies no longer count for much. Even the police are useless without the unions if the latter cannot police the factories and elsewhere. In May ’68, it was the unions who saved the regime, but now their knell is being sounded. The import of the stakes is profoundly expressed in the utter confusion of events such as the Renault strike and May ’68 (and this holds good for student demonstrations just as it does for the Renault strikes). To strike or not to strike. Where do we stand on this? No-one can decide any more. What are the objectives? Where are the enemy? What are we talking about? The Geiger counters that the unions, parties and micro-groups used to measure the masses’ readiness for combat are thrown into turmoil. The student movement is too fluid for the hands of those who would like to structure it according to their own objec- tives: don’t they have any objectives? In any case, it did not want to become objectified behind its back. The workers went back to work without gaining a thing, while eight days beforehand they had refused when they were offered palpable benefits. In fact, this confusion is similar to what happens in dreams: it betrays a resistance or a censorship acting on the dream- content itself. Here it betrays something of vital importance, something difficult, however, for the proletarians themselves to accept: the social struggle has been displaced from the traditional, external enemy of the class, management and capital, onto the internal class enemy, the proper repre- sentative authority for the class, the party or the union. These are the authorities to which the workers delegate their power, which is turned against them under the form of management or government delegations of power. Capital itself only alienates labour power and its product, its only monopoly is production. Parties and unions alienate social power from the exploited and have a monopoly on representation. Calling them into ques- tion is a revolutionary historical development. But this development is paid for by a loss of clarity, a loss of resolution, an apparent regression, the absence of continuity, logic and objectives, etc. This is because everything becomes uncertain when it is a matter of confronting one’s own repressive agency, of driving the unionist, shop steward, official or spokesperson from Symbolic Exchange and Death48 one’s own head. But the confusing character of spring ’73 indicates precisely that we have fundamentally located the problem: the unions and parties are dead, all that remains for them to do is die. The Corrupted Proletariat The crisis of representation is the crucial polit- ical aspect of the latest social movements. In itself, this crisis may prove fatal to the system, and already we can see the emerging outline (in the unions themselves) of its formal overcoming (its recuperation) in a gener- alised schema of self-management. No more delegation of power – everyone will be fully responsible for production! The new ideological generation is coming! But it will have a great deal to do, because this crisis is intricately bound up with another crisis, deeper still, which touches production itself, the very system of productivity. And there again, indirectly of course, the immigrants are in the position of analysts. Just as they analyse the ‘proletariat’s’ relation to its representative agencies, they analyse the workers’ relation to their own labour power, their relation to themselves as a productive force (and not only to a few of them, selected as representative authorities). This is because they have recently been extracted from a non-productivist tradition; because they had to be socially destructured in order to be thrown into the process of Western labour, and because, in return, it is they who thoroughly destructure the general process and morality of production which dominates Western societies. It is just as if their forced recruitment into the European market pro- voked an increasing corruption of the European proletariat as regards labour and production. It is no longer simply a matter of ‘clandestine’ practices of resistance to labour (go-slows, wastage, absenteeism, etc.), which have never stopped. This time the workers downed tools openly, collectively and spontaneously, just like that, suddenly, asking for nothing, negotiating nothing, to the great despair of both unions and management, and started work again just as spontaneously, as a group, the following Monday. Neither failure nor victory, it was not a strike, it was just a ‘stop- page’, a euphemism which says far more than the term ‘strike’. The whole discipline of labour collapses, all the moral norms and practices that indus- trial colonisation has imposed on Europe for two centuries disintegrate and are forgotten with apparent ease, without the ‘class struggle’ strictly speaking. Discontinuity, latitudinarianism, indiscipline as regards working hours, indifference with regard to wage pressure, to surplus, promotion, accumu- lation, forecasting. You do only what you have to, then stop and go back to it later. This is exactly the behaviour that inhabitants of ‘developing countries’ were reproached for by the colonists, who found it impossible to train the inhabitants to obey value and labour, rational and continuous time, the concept of saving wages, and so on. It is only by sending them abroad that the inhabitants were finally integrated into the labour process. And it is at precisely this point that Western workers start to ‘regress’ more and more into the behaviour of ‘underdeveloped’ inhabitants. It is not that seeing the Western proletariat in the grip of corruption constitutes a revenge 49 The End of Production for colonisation in its most advanced form (importing manual labour), although one day it might have to be the turn of the proletariat to be exported to the developing countries in order to relearn the historical and revolutionary values of labour. There is a direct relation between the ultra-colonisation of immigrant workers (since the colonies were not profitable where they were, they had to be imported) and the industrial de-colonisation which affects every sec- tor of society (everywhere, in schools and in factories, we move from the hot phase of the investment of labour to the cynical and cool execution of tasks). Because they have most recently left their ‘savage’ indifference for ‘rational’ labour, these immigrants (and the young or rural semi-skilled workers) are in a position to analyse Western society with the recent, fragile, superficial and arbitrary collectivisation enforced by labour, this collective paranoia, which has spawned a morality, a culture and a myth. We have forgotten that it was only two centuries ago that this industrial discipline was imposed, at unprecedented cost, on the West itself, that it has never quite succeeded and is beginning to crack dangerously (it will barely have lasted as long, indeed, as overseas colonisation). Strike for Strike’s Sake Strike for strike’s sake is the true condition of the contemporary struggle. Unmotivated, with neither objective nor political referent, it is the oppositional response adopted against a production which is also unmotivated, with neither a referent, nor a social use-value, nor any other finality than its own – production for production’s sake, in short, a sys- tem which has become only a system of reproduction, revolving around itself in a gigantic tautology of the labour process. Strike for strike’s sake is the complementary tautology, but, since it unveils a new form of capital corresponding to the final stage of the law of value, it is also subversive. Strikes have at last ceased to be a means, and only a means, of putting pressure on the relation of political forces and the power game. It becomes an end. Even on their own ground they negate, by means of a radical parody, the sort of finality without end that production has become. In production for production’s sake, there is no more waste. We have no use for this term, which means something only in a restricted utilitarian economy. It relies on a pious critique of the system. Concorde, the space programme, etc., are not a waste of resources; on the contrary, since the system, having reached this high point of ‘objective’ futility, produces and reproduces labour itself. Besides, this is precisely what everyone (including the workers and the unions) demands of it. Everything revolves around jobs (the social is just a matter of job creation), and in order to keep their jobs, the British unions are prepared to transform Concorde into a supersonic bomber. Inflation or unem- ployment? Long live inflation! Labour, like social security, has come to be just another consumer good to be distributed throughout society. The enormous paradox is that the less labour becomes a productive force, the more it becomes a product. This is not the least important characteristic of the current mutations of the capitalist system, the revolution from the specific stage of Symbolic Exchange and Death50 production to the stage of reproduction. It has less and less need of labour power in order to function and grow, while there are increasing demands on it to produce more and more labour. Corresponding to the absurd circularity of a system where one labours only to produce more labour is the demand for strikes for strikes’ sake (at any rate, this is the point at which the majority of ‘protest’ strikes have today come to an end). ‘Pay us for the days we are on strike’ basically means ‘pay us in order that we may reproduce strikes for strikes’ sake’. This is the reversal of the absurdity of the system in general. Today, all products, labour included, are beyond both use and futility. There is no more productive labour, only reproductive labour. In the same way there is no more ‘productive’ or ‘unproductive’ consumption, only a reproductive consumption. Leisure is as productive as labour, factory labour as ‘unproductive’ as leisure or the service industries, it is irrelevant what formula we use. This indifference precisely marks the phase of the completion of political economy. Everyone is reproductive; that is, everyone has lost the concrete finality which once marked them out from one another. Nobody produces any more. Production is dead, long live reproduction! The Genealogy of Production The system currently reproduces capital according to its most rigorous definition, as the form of social relations, rather than in its vulgar sense as money, profits and the economic system. Reproduction has always been understood as, and determined by, an ‘increasing’ reproduction of the mode of production, even though it became necessary to conceive of the mode of production as a modality (and not the only one) of the mode of reproduction. Productive forces and the relations of production, the sphere of material productivity in other words, are perhaps only one of many possible, and therefore historically relative, conjunctions of the process of reproduction. Reproduction is a form which far outstrips economic exploitation, and so the play of productive forces is not its necessary condition. The historical status of the ‘proletariat’ (the industrial wage-earners) is primarily one of incarceration, concentration and exclusion. The seventeenth- century incarceration described by Foucault 20 expands grotesquely in the age of industrial manufacture. Didn’t ‘industrial’ labour (which, unlike cot- tage industries, is collective, controlled, and stripped of the means of production) evolve within the first great hôpitaux généraux? In the begin- ning, society, in the process of rationalisation, incarcerated its idle, its wanderers, its deviants, gave them an ‘occupation’ and fixed them, imposed its rational principle of labour on them. But these outcasts contaminated the process of rationalisation in turn, and the rupture produced when soci- ety instituted its principle of rationality spilled over the whole of the society of labour: the Great Confinement is a model in miniature, later generalised in the industrial system of every society that, under the sign of labour and productivist finality, became a concentration camp, a detention centre or a prison. 51 The End of Production Instead of extending the concepts of the proletariat and exploitation to racial or sexual oppression and such like, we should ask ourselves if it is not the other way round. What if the fundamental status of the worker, like the mad, the dead, nature, beasts, children, Blacks and women, was initially to be not exploited but excommunicated? What if he was initially not deprived and exploited but discriminated against and branded? My hypothesis is that there has never been a genuine class struggle except on the grounds of this discrimination: sub-humans struggle against their status as beasts, against the abjection of the caste division that con- demns them to the sub-humanity of labour. This lies behind every strike and every revolt, and today it is still behind the most ‘wage-related’ demon- strations. Hence their virulence. Having said that, today the proletarian is a ‘normal’ being, the worker has been promised the dignity of a full ‘human being’, and, moreover, in accordance with this category, he seizes onto every dominant discrimination: he is racist, sexist and repressive. As regards today’s deviants and whoever is discriminated against, no matter what their social standing, he has sided with the bourgeoisie and the normal human being. How true: the fundamental law of this society is not the law of exploitation, but the code of normality. May ’68: The Illusion of Production The first shockwaves of this transition from production to pure and simple reproduction took place in May ’68. They struck the universities first, and the faculty of human sciences first of all, because that was where it became most evident (even without a clear ‘political’ consciousness) that we were no longer productive, only reproduc- tive (and that lecturers, science and culture were themselves only relays in the general reproduction of the system). All this was experienced as total futility, irresponsibility (‘What are sociologists for?’), as a relegation, and provoked the student movement of ’68 (rather than the absence of pros- pects, since there are always plenty of prospects in reproduction – it was rather the places, the spaces where something actually happens that had ceased to exist). These shockwaves are still being felt. They cannot but reach the very limits of the system, as soon as entire sectors of society topple from the rank of productive forces to the pure and simple status of reproductive forces. Although this process was first felt in the cultural sectors of science, justice and the family – the so-called ‘superstructural’ sectors – it is clear today that it is progressively affecting the entire so-called ‘infrastructural’ sector: a new generation of partial, savage and occasional strikes since ’68 testify no lon- ger to the ‘class struggle’ of a proletariat attached to production, but to the revolt of those who, even in the factories, are attached to reproduction. Nevertheless, in this same sector there are marginal, anomic groups who are the first to register these effects: young semi-skilled workers brought directly from rural areas into the factories, immigrants, non-union mem- bers; and so on. For all the above mentioned reasons, the ‘traditional’, organised and unionised proletariat have looked likely to be the last to Symbolic Exchange and Death52 react, since it is they who can entertain the illusion of ‘productive’ labour for longest. The consciousness of being, in relation to everyone else, the true ‘producers’ and, albeit at the cost of the exploitation, nevertheless being at the very source of social wealth is a ‘proletarian’ consciousness which is reinforced and sanctioned by the organisation, constituting what is cer- tainly the most solid ideological defence against the destructuration of the current system which, far from turning whole strata of the population into proletarians or, as Marxian theory proper has it, expanding the exploitation of ‘productive’ labour, aligns everybody under the same reproductive worker status. ‘Productive’ manual workers, more than anybody else, thrive on the illusion of production just as they experience their leisure under the illusion of freedom. As long as these things are experienced as sources of wealth or satisfac- tion, as use-value, then the worst, most alienated and exploited labour is bearable. As long as we can still discover a ‘production’ corresponding (even if this is only in the imagination) to individual or social needs (this is why the concept of need is so fundamental and so mystifying), the worst indi- vidual or historical situations are bearable because the illusion of production is always the illusory coincidence of production and use-value. Those who today believe in the use-value of their labour power – the proletariat – are virtually the most mystified and the least susceptible to this revolt which grabs people from the depths of their total futility and the circular manip- ulation which turns them into pure markers of senseless reproduction. The day that this process spreads to all of society, May ’68 will assume the form of a general explosion, and the problem of the link between the students and the workers will no longer be posed: it merely betrays the gulf that separates those in the current system who still believe in their own labour force and those who no longer believe in it. Political Economy as a Model of Simulation From now on political economy is the real for us, which is to say precisely that it is the sign’s referential, the horizon of a defunct order whose simu- lation preserves it in a ‘dialectical’ equilibrium. It is the real, and therefore the imaginary, since here again the two formerly distinct categories have fused and drifted together. The code (the structural law of value) uses the systematic reactivation of political economy (the restricted market law of value) as our society’s imaginary-real. Furthermore, the appearance of the restricted form of value is an attempt to obscure its radical form. Profit, surplus-value, the mechanics of capital and the class struggle: the entire critical discourse on political economy is staged as a referential dis- course. The mystery of value is enacted on stage (of course, the mystery has simply acquired a new value: the structural law of value has become mys- terious): everyone agrees as to the ‘determining instance’ of economics, and 53 The End of Production this has become ‘obscene’.21 This is a provocation. Capital no longer looks to nature, God or morality, but strictly to political economy and its critique for its alibis, and lives through its own denunciation from within itself – feedback or a dialectical stimulus. Hence the essential role played by Marxian analysis in designer capital. The same scenario is played out in economics as Bourdieu and Passeron describe it, taking place in the academic system whose alleged autonomy enables it to reproduce the class structure of society very efficiently. Similarly, the alleged autonomy of political economy (or rather its value as a determining agency) enables it to reproduce, just as efficiently, capital’s symbolic function, its real domination over life and death established by the code, and which is continually stirring up political economy as a medium, an alibi and a fig-leaf. A machine has to function if it is to reproduce relations of production. A commodity must have a use-value in order to sustain the system of exchange-value. This was the first-level scenario. Simulation is today at the second level: a commodity must function as an exchange-value in order better to hide the fact that it circulates like a sign and reproduces the code.22 Society has to reproduce itself as class society, as class struggle, it must ‘function’ at the Marxian-critical level in order the better to mask the sys- tem’s real law and the possibility of its symbolic destruction. Marcuse pointed out a long time ago that dialectical materialism was getting out of hand: far from being deconstructed by the forces of production, the rela- tions of production from now on submit to the forces of production (science, technology, etc.) and find a new legitimacy in them. There again, we must pass on to the second level: the social relations of symbolic dom- ination utterly submit to the mode of production (both the forces of production and the relations of production), where we find, in the apparent movement of political economy and the revolution, a new legitimacy and the most perfect alibi. Hence the necessity of resurrecting and dramatising political economy in the form of a movie script, to screen out the threat of symbolic destruction. Hence the kind of crisis, the perpetual simulacrum of a crisis, we are dealing with today. In the aesthetic stage of political economy, the finality–without–end of production, the ethical, ascetic myth of accumulation and labour collapses. Capital, to avoid the risk of bursting from these liquefied values, thus becomes nostalgic once more for its great ethical epoch when production had a meaning, the golden age of shortages and the development of the forces of production. In order to re-establish finalities and to reactivate the principle of economics, we must generate shortages once again. Hence ecol- ogy, where the danger of absolute scarcity reinstates an ethic of energy conservation. Hence the crisis of energy and raw materials, a real blessing for a sys- tem which, in the mirror of production, only reflects a fluctuating, empty form. The crisis will enable the return of a lost referentiality to Symbolic Exchange and Death54 the economic code, and will give the principle of production a gravity that evaded it. We will rediscover a taste for ascesis, that pathetic investment born of lack and deprivation. The whole recent ecological turn had already taken up this process of regeneration during the crisis – no longer a crisis of overproduction as in 1929 – of the involution of the system, recycling its lost identity.23 A crisis no longer of production, but of reproduction (hence the impossibility of grasping how much truth and how much simulacrum there may be in this crisis). Ecology is production haunted by shortages and using itself as a resource, once more discovering a natural necessity where the law of value is tried out again. But ecology is too slow. A sudden crisis, as happened with oil, constitutes a more energetic therapy. The less oil there is, the more we will become aware of how much production there is. From the moment that the place of raw materials is noted again, labour power will also resume its rightful place, and the entire mechanism of production will become intelligible once more. Production has been given another chance. So don’t panic. On the eve of the intensive mobilisation of labour power, when the ethics of labour power threatened to collapse, the crisis of material energy came at the right time to mask the truly catastrophic destruction of the finality of production, and displaced it onto a simple internal contradiction (but we know that the system thrives on its contradictions). There is still an illusion in thinking that the capitalist system, at a cer- tain threshold of increased reproduction, passes irreversibly from a strategy of shortage to a strategy of abundance. The current crisis proves that this strategy is reversible. The illusion still comes from a naïve faith in a reality of shortage or a reality of abundance, and therefore from the illusion of a real opposition between these two terms. When these two terms are quite simply alternatives, the strategic definition of neo-capitalism is to pass into not a phase of abundance (consumption, repressive desublimation, sexual liberation, etc.) but a phase of systematic alternation between the two terms – shortage and abundance – because neither retains a reference, nor therefore an antagonistic reality, and therefore because the system is indif- ferent to which one it employs. The indeterminacy affecting terms, the neutralisation of a dialectical oppo- sition into a pure and simple structural alternation, produces the characteristic effect of an uncertainty surrounding the reality of the crisis. Everyone tries to stave off the unbearable simulacrum-effect – characteristic of everything that issues from the systematic operation of the code – as a conspiracy. It is comforting to think that it was ‘great capital’ that provoked the crisis, because it restores a real political-economic agency and the presence of a (hidden) subject of the crisis, and therefore an historical truth. The terror of the simulacrum is over. So much the better: it is better to have the omni- present political-economic fatality of capital than not, so long as it is clearly true. Better the economic atrocities of capital – profit, exploitation – than to face up to the situation we are in, where everything operates or breaks down through effects of the code. Misconstrual [méconnaissance] of the ‘truth’ of 55 The End of Production this global domination (if there is a global domination) is proportional to the crisis itself, where it is revealed for the first time on a massive scale. The 1929 crisis was still a crisis of capital, measured by its rates of rein- vestment, surplus-value and profit, a crisis of (over)production measured by the social finalities of consumption. The crisis is resolved by regulating demand in an endless exchange of finalities between production and con- sumption. From now on (and conclusively after the Second World War), production and consumption cease to be opposed and possibly contradic- tory poles. At a stroke, the entire economic field loses all internal determinacy along with the very possibility of a crisis. It no longer survives except as a process of economic simulation at the fringes of a process of reproduction, into which it is entirely absorbed.24 Have there ever been real shortages to grant the economic principle a reality, so that today we could say that it is disappearing and no longer functions save as a myth, an alternative myth, moreover, to that of abun- dance? In the course of history, have shortages ever had a use-value, an irreducible economic finality, so that today we could say that it has disap- peared in the cycle of reproduction, merely consolidating the code’s hegemonic control over genuine matters of life and death? We are saying that in order for the economy to produce itself (and this is all it ever pro- duces), it needs this dialectical tension between scarcity and abundance. For the system to reproduce itself, however, it now requires only the mythical operation of the economy. It is because the entire economic sphere has been defused that every- thing can be expressed in terms of political economy and production. Economics, preferably in its Marxian variety, becomes the explicit discourse of a whole society, the vulgate of every analysis. Sociologists, human scien- tists, etc. (even Christians, especially Christians of course), turn to Marxism as the discourse to which they refer. A whole new Divine Left is rising. Everything has become ‘political’ and ‘ideological’ by the same endless drift of the operation of integration. The newsflash is political, sport is political, not to mention art: reason is everywhere on the side of the class struggle. The entire latent discourse of capital has become manifest, we notice a widespread jubilation secure in the assumption of this ‘truth’. May ’68 marked the decisive step in the naturalisation of political econ- omy. Because the shock of May ’68 shook the system down to the depths of its symbolic organisation, it has given urgency to a vital transition from ‘superstructural’ (moral, cultural, etc.) ideologies to an ideologisation of the infrastructure itself. By giving official status to oppositional discourse, cap- ital will consolidate its power under cover of economic and political legislation. Political economy, Marxian political economy, has sealed the rift of May ’68, just as the unions and the left-wing parties ‘negotiated’ the crisis on the ground. The hidden referent of economics and politics has therefore been dug up only in order to retrieve a catastrophic situation, and today it continues to be circulated, generalised and desperately reproduced, since the catastrophic situation opened up by May ’68 is not over. Symbolic Exchange and Death56 If we dared, we would say that economics and its critique are only super- structural; we will not dare, however, since to do so would only be to twist this old image around – where would the infrastructure be then? Etc. It would also provide economics with a chance to reappear one day in accor- dance with the see-saw effect which itself belongs to the code. We have been tricked too often with the infrastructure to start this mask-play up again. The system itself has put an end to infra- and superstructural deter- minations. Today it pretends to take political economy as the infrastructure because Marx kindly whispered this alternative strategy to it, but actually capital has never really functioned on this imaginary distinction, it is not that naïve. Its potency comes directly from its simultaneous development at every level, and from never having fundamentally posed itself the ques- tion of determination, the cunning distinction of agencies, or ‘ideology’. It has never confused itself with production, as did Marx and every subse- quent revolutionary who believed and still believes in production, confusing their phantasies with their lunatic hopes. For its part, capital is content to extend its laws in a single movement, inexorably occupying all the inter- stices of life without confusing its priorities. If it has set men to work, capital has also impelled them to culture, needs, languages and functional idioms, information and communication; it directs them to rights, to liberty and sexuality, it forces the instinct of preservation and the death instinct upon them; it has set them up everywhere in accordance with myths that are simultaneously opposed and indifferent. This is its only law: indifference. To set up a hierarchy of agencies would be far too dangerous a game, and would run the risk of backfiring. No, better to level out, neutralise, cover over and indifferentiate, which is what it knows how to do; that’s how it follows its law. But it also dissimulates this fundamental process under the ‘determinant’ mask of political economy. In the immense polymorphous machine of contemporary capital, the symbolic (gift and counter-gift, reciprocity and reversal, expenditure and sacrifice) no longer counts for anything, nature (the great referential of the origin and substance, the subject/object dialectic, and so on) no longer counts, political economy itself only survives in a brain-dead state, but all these phantoms continue to plague the operational field of value. Perhaps here, on an immense scale, we can discern the echo of what Marx drew to our attention: every event first passes through an historical existence before being revived under a parodical form. In our day, however, these two phases telescope, since good old materialist history has itself become a process of simulation, no longer even offering the chance of a grotesque, theatrical parody: today the terror based on things voided of their substance exerts itself directly, and simulacra immediately anticipate every determination of our lives. Now, rather than theatre and the imaginary, there is a fierce strat- egy of neutralisation that no longer leaves any significant place for a Napoleon III-type slapstick, an historical farce which, to Marx’s mind, is effortlessly overcome by real history. It is a different matter as regards the simulacra which eliminate both ourselves and history simultaneously. 57 The End of Production But perhaps all this arises from a general illusion in Marx concerning the possibilities for a revolution of the system. He had clearly seen the extent to which there already lurked in capital in his own time a capacity for it to undermine its own bases and go ‘into overdrive’. He clearly saw that capital tended to reduce, if not totally eliminate, the labour power in its processes, and substitute a dead labour power for it. Since, however, he thought that living labour power was the objective, historical and necessary foundation of capital, he could only think that it was digging its own grave. The illusion is that capital buried labour power. More subtly, however, it turns labour power into the second term of a stable opposition with capital. It makes this rupturing energy which should shatter the relations of production into a term homogeneous with the relations of production, in a simulation of opposition under the sign of dead labour. From now on a single hegemonic agency (dead labour) divides into capital and living labour. The antagonism is resolved by a binary apparatus of coded operativity. But what, you might ask, of surplus-value and production? Alright, capital doesn’t give a damn. Without lending capital a Marxist’s intuition (even though Marx did every- thing he could to alert capital to what was waiting for it: if it persisted in playing on the terrain of production, it was heading for its death in the short term – the economy was a fatal trap for capital), everything happened as if it had clearly understood Marx on this point and had, in consequence, ‘cho- sen’ to liquidate production so as to go onto another kind of strategy. I am saying that everything happens as if, because it is not completely certain that capital ever had this productivist view of itself (Marx was basically the only one who had, and he projected this phantasy onto it as an historical truth); it is more likely that it only ever played at production, even if this meant that production had to be abandoned at a later stage, were it to draw capital into fatal contradictions. Has capital ever taken production seri- ously? Don’t be so stupid: at the height of the seriousness of production, capital is doubtless only a simulation. That is why the only acts that accompany capital’s real domination are situated in the field of this radical indeterminacy and break with this dissuasive economic strategy. We will not destroy the system by a direct, dialectical revolution of the economic or political infrastructure. Everything produced by contradiction, by the relation of forces, or by energy in general, will only feed back into the mechanism and give it impetus, following a circular distortion similar to a Moebius strip. We will never defeat it by following its own logic of energy, calculation, reason and revolution, history and power, or some final- ity or counter-finality. The worst violence at this level has no purchase, and will only backfire against itself. We will never defeat the system on the plane of the real: the worst error of all our revolutionary strategies is to believe that we will put an end to the system on the plane of the real: this is their imaginary, imposed on them by the system itself, living or surviving only by always leading those who attack the system to fight amongst each other on the terrain of reality, which is always the reality of the system. Symbolic Exchange and Death58 This is where they throw all their energies, their imaginary violence, where an implacable logic constantly turns back into the system. We have only to do it violence or counter-violence since it thrives on symbolic violence – not in the degraded sense in which this formula has found fortune, as a violence ‘of signs’, from which the system draws strength, or with which it ‘masks’ its material violence: symbolic violence is deduced from a logic of the sym- bolic (which has nothing to do with the sign or with energy): reversal, the incessant reversibility of the counter-gift and, conversely, the seizing of power by the unilateral exercise of the gift.25 We must therefore displace everything into the sphere of the symbolic, where challenge, reversal and overbidding are the law, so that we can respond to death only by an equal or superior death. There is no question here of real violence or force, the only question concerns the challenge and the logic of the symbolic. If domination comes from the system’s retention of the exclu- sivity of the gift without counter-gift – the gift of work which can only be responded to by destruction or sacrifice, if not in consumption, which is only a spiral of the system of surplus-gratification without result, therefore a spiral of surplus-domination; a gift of media and messages to which, due to the monopoly of the code, nothing is allowed to retort; the gift, every- where and at every instant, of the social, of the protection agency, security, gratification and the solicitation of the social from which nothing is any longer permitted to escape – then the only solution is to turn the principle of its power back against the system itself: the impossibility of responding or retorting. To defy the system with a gift to which it cannot respond save by its own collapse and death. Nothing, not even the system, can avoid the symbolic obligation, and it is in this trap that the only chance of a catastro- phe for capital remains. The system turns on itself, as a scorpion does when encircled by the challenge of death. For it is summoned to answer, if it is not to lose face, to what can only be death. The system must itself commit suicide in response to the multiplied challenge of death and suicide. So hostages are taken. On the symbolic or sacrificial plane, from which every moral consideration of the innocence of the victims is ruled out, the hostage is the substitute, the alter-ego of the ‘terrorist’ – the hostage’s death for the terrorist’s. Hostage and terrorist may thereafter become confused in the same sacrificial act. The stakes are death without any possibility of negotiation, and therefore return to an inevitable overbidding. Of course, they attempt to deploy the whole system of negotiation, and the terrorists themselves often enter into this exchange scenario in terms of this calcu- lated equivalence (the hostages’ lives against some ransom or liberation, or indeed for the prestige of the operation alone). From this perspective, tak- ing hostages is not original at all, it simply creates an unforeseen and selective relation of forces which can be resolved either by traditional vio- lence or by negotiation. It is a tactical action. There is something else at stake, however, as we clearly saw at The Hague over the course of ten days of incredible negotiations: no-one knew what could be negotiated, nor could they agree on terms, nor on the possible equivalences of the exchange. 59 The End of Production Or again, even if they were formulated, the ‘terrorists’ demands’ amounted to a radical denial of negotiation. It is precisely here that everything is played out, for with the impossibility of all negotiation we pass into the symbolic order, which is ignorant of this type of calculation and exchange (the system itself lives solely by negotiation, even if this takes place in the equilibrium of violence). The system can only respond to this irruption of the symbolic (the most serious thing to befall it, basically the only ‘revolution’) by the real, physical death of the terrorists. This, however, is its defeat, since their death was their stake, so that by bringing about their deaths the system has merely impaled itself on its own violence without really responding to the challenge that was thrown to it. Because the system can easily compute every death, even war atrocities, but cannot compute the death-challenge or symbolic death, since this death has no calculable equivalent, it opens up an inexpiable overbidding by other means than a death in exchange. Nothing corresponds to death except death. Which is precisely what happens in this case: the system itself is driven to suicide in return, which suicide is manifest in its disarray and defeat. However infin- itesimal in terms of relations of forces it might be, the colossal apparatus of power is eliminated in this situation where (the very excess of its) derision is turned back against itself. The police and the army, all the insti- tutions and mobilised violence of power whether individually or massed together, can do nothing against this lowly but symbolic death. For this death draws it onto a plane where there is no longer any response possible for it (hence the sudden structural liquefaction of power in ’68, not because it was less strong, but because of the simple symbolic displace- ment operated by the students’ practices). The system can only die in exchange, defeat itself to lift the challenge. Its death at this instant is a symbolic response, but a death which wears it out. The challenge has the efficiency of a murderer. Every society apart from ours knows that, or used to know it. Ours is in the process of rediscovering it. The routes of symbolic effectiveness are those of an alternative politics. Thus the dying ascetic challenges God ever to give him the equivalent of this death. God does all he can to give him this equivalent ‘a hundred times over’, in the form of prestige, of spiritual power, indeed of global hegemony. But the ascetic’s secret dream is to attain such an extent of mortification that even God would be unable either to take up the chal- lenge, or to absorb the debt. He will then have triumphed over God, and become God himself. That is why the ascetic is always close to heresy and sacrilege, and as such condemned by the Church, whose function it is merely to preserve God from this symbolic face-to-face, to protect Him from this mortal challenge where He is summoned to die, to sacrifice Himself in order to take up the challenge of the mortified ascetic. The Church will have had this role for all time, avoiding this type of cata- strophic confrontation (catastrophic primarily for the Church) and substituting a rule-bound exchange of penitences and gratifications, the impressario of a system of equivalences between God and men. Symbolic Exchange and Death60 The same situation exists in our relation to the system of power. All these institutions, all these social, economic, political and psychological mediations, are there so that no-one ever has the opportunity to issue this symbolic challenge, this challenge to the death, the irreversible gift which, like the absolute mortification of the ascetic, brings about a victory over all power, however powerful its authority may be. It is no longer necessary that the possibility of this direct symbolic confrontation ever takes place. And this is the source of our profound boredom. This is why taking hostages and other similar acts rekindle some fascination: they are at once an exorbitant mirror for the system of its own repressive vio- lence, and the model of a symbolic violence which is always forbidden it, the only violence it cannot exert: its own death. Labour and Death Other societies have known multiple stakes: over birth and kinship, the soul and the body, the true and the false, reality and appearance. Political econ- omy has reduced them to just one: production. But then the stakes were large, the violence extreme and hopes too high. Today this is over. The system has rid production of all real stakes. A more radical truth is dawning, however, and the system’s victory allows us to glimpse this fundamental stake. It is even retrospectively becoming possible to analyse the whole of political economy as having nothing to do with production, as having stakes of life and death. A symbolic stake. Every stake is symbolic. There have only ever been symbolic stakes. This dimension is etched everywhere into the structural law of value, every- where immanent in the code. Labour power is instituted on death. A man must die to become labour power. He converts this death into a wage. But the economic violence cap- ital inflicted on him in the equivalence of the wage and labour power is nothing next to the symbolic violence inflicted on him by his definition as a productive force. Faking this equivalence is nothing next to the equiva- lence, qua signs, of wages and death. The very possibility of quantitative equivalence presupposes death. The equivalence of wages and labour power presupposes the death of the worker, while that of any commodity and any other presupposes the sym- bolic extermination of objects. Death makes the calculation of equivalence, and regulation by indifference, possible in general. This death is not violent and physical, it is the indifferent consumption of life and death, the mutual neutralisation of life and death survival, or death deferred. Labour is slow death. This is generally understood in the sense of phys- ical exhaustion. But it must be understood in another sense. Labour is not opposed, like a sort of death, to the ‘fulfilment of life’, which is the ideal- ist view; labour is opposed as a slow death to a violent death. That is the symbolic reality. Labour is opposed as deferred death to the immediate 61 The End of Production death of sacrifice. Against every pious and ‘revolutionary’ view of the ‘labour (or culture) is the opposite of life’ type, we must maintain that the only alternative to labour is not free time, or non-labour, it is sacrifice. All this becomes clear in the genealogy of the slave. First, the prisoner of war is purely and simply put to death (one does him an honour in this way). Then he is ‘spared’ [épargné] and conserved [conservé] (=servus), under the category of spoils of war and a prestige good: he becomes a slave and passes into sumptuary domesticity. It is only later that he passes into servile labour. However, he is no longer a ‘labourer’, since labour only appears in the phase of the serf or the emancipated slave, finally relieved of the mortgage of being put to death. Why is he freed? Precisely in order to work. Labour therefore everywhere draws its inspiration from deferred death. It comes from deferred death. Slow or violent, immediate or deferred, the scansion of death is decisive: it is what radically distinguishes two types of organisation, the economic and the sacrificial. We live irreversibly in the first of these, which has inexorably taken root in the différance of death. The scenario has never changed. Whoever works has not been put to death, he is refused this honour. And labour is first of all the sign of being judged worthy only of life. Does capital exploit the workers to death? Paradoxically, the worst it inflicts on them is refusing them death. It is by deferring their death that they are made into slaves and condemned to the indefinite abjection of a life of labour. The substance of labour and exploitation is indifferent in this symbolic relation. The power of the master always primarily derives from this sus- pension of death. Power is therefore never, contrary to what we might imagine, the power of putting to death, but exactly the opposite, that of allowing to live – a life that the slave lacks the power to give. The master confiscates the death of the other while retaining the right to risk his own. The slave is refused this, and is condemned to a life without return, and therefore without possible expiation. By removing death, the master removes the slave from the circulation of symbolic goods. This is the violence the master does to the slave, condemn- ing him to labour power. There lies the secret of power (in the dialectic of the master and the slave, Hegel also derives the domination of the master from the deferred threat of death hanging over the slave). Labour, produc- tion and exploitation would only be one of the possible avatars of this power structure, which is a structure of death. This changes every revolutionary perspective on the abolition of power. If power is death deferred, it will not be removed insofar as the suspension of this death will not be removed. And if power, of which this is always and everywhere the definition, resides in the act of giving without being given, it is clear that the power the master has to unilaterally grant life will only be abolished if this life can be given to him – in a non-deferred death. There is no other alternative; you will never abolish this power by staying alive, since there will have been no reversal of what has been given. Only the surrender of this life, retaliating against a deferred death with an immediate Symbolic Exchange and Death62 death, constitutes a radical response, and the only possibility of abolishing power. No revolutionary strategy can begin without the slave putting his own death back at stake, since this is what the master puts off in the différance from which he profits by securing his power. Refuse to be put to death, refuse to live in the mortal reprieve of power, refuse the duty of this life and never be quits with living, in effect be under obligation to settle this long-term credit through the slow death of labour, since this slow death does not alter the future of this abject dimension, in the fatality of power. Violent death changes everything, slow death changes nothing, for there is a rhythm, a scansion necessary to symbolic exchange: something has to be given in the same movement and following the same rhythm, otherwise there is no reciprocity and it is quite simply not given. The strategy of the system of power is to displace the time of the exchange, substituting conti- nuity and mortal linearity for the immediate retaliation of death. It is thus futile for the slave (the worker) to give little by little, in infinitesimal doses, to the rope of labour on which he is hung to death, to give his life to the master or to capital, for this ‘sacrifice’ in small doses is no longer a sacrifice – it doesn’t touch the most important thing, the différance of death, and merely distils a process whose structure remains the same. We could in fact advance the hypothesis that in labour the exploited renders his life to the exploiter and thereby regains, by means of this very exploitation, a power of symbolic response. There was counter-power in the labour process as the exploited put their own (slow) death at stake. Here we agree with Lyotard’s hypothesis on the level of libidinal economics: the intensity of the exploited’s enjoyment [jouissance] in their very abjection. And Lyotard is right. Libidinal intensity, the charge of desire and the sur- rendering of death are always there in the exploited,26 but no longer on the properly symbolic rhythm of the immediate retaliation, and therefore total resolution. The enjoyment of powerlessness (on sole condition that this is not a phantasy aimed at reinstating the triumph of desire at the level of the proletariat) will never abolish power. The very modality of the response to the slow death of labour leaves the master the possibility of, once again, repeatedly, giving the slave life through labour. The accounts are never settled, it always profits power, the dialectic of power which plays on the splitting of the poles of death, the poles of exchange. The slave remains the prisoner of the master’s dialectic, while his death, or his distilled life, serves the indefinite repetition of domination. This domination increases as the system is charged with neutralising the symbolic retaliation by buying it back through wages. If, through labour, the exploited attempts to give his life to the exploiter, the latter wards off this restitution by means of wages. Here again we must take a symbolic radio- graph. Contrary to all appearances and experience (capital buys its labour power from the worker and extorts surplus labour), capital gives labour to the worker (and the worker himself gives capital to the capitalist). In German this is Arbeitgeber: the entrepreneur is a ‘provider of labour’; and Arbeitnehmer: it is the capitalist who gives, who has the initiative of the gift, 63 The End of Production which secures him, as in every social order, a pre-eminence and a power far beyond the economic. The refusal of labour, in its radical form, is the refusal of this symbolic domination and the humiliation of being bestowed upon. The gift and the taking of labour function directly as the code of the dom- inant social relation, as the code of discrimination. Wages are the mark of this poisonous gift, the sign which epitomises the whole code. They sanc- tion this unilateral gift of labour, or rather wages symbolically buy back the domination exercised by capital through the gift of labour. At the same time, they furnish capital with the possibility of confining the operation to a contractual dimension, thus stabilising confrontation on economic ground. Furthermore, wages turn the wage-earner into a ‘consumer of goods’, reit- erating his status as a ‘consumer of labour’ and reinforcing his symbolic deficit. To refuse labour, to dispute wages is thus to put the process of the gift, expiation and economic compensation back into question, and there- fore to expose the fundamental symbolic process. Wages are no longer ‘grabbed’ today. You too are given a wage, not in exchange for labour, but so that you spend it, which is itself another kind of labour. In the consumption or use of objects, the wage-consumer finds herself reproducing exactly the same symbolic relation of slow death as she undergoes in labour. The user experiences exactly the same deferred death in the object (she does not sacrifice it, she ‘uses’ it and ‘uses’ it functionally) as the worker does in capital. And just as wages buy back this unilateral gift of labour, the price paid for the object is only the user buying back the object’s deferred death. The proof of this lies in the symbolic rule which states that what falls to you without charge (lotteries, presents, gambling wins) must not be devoted to use, but spent as pure loss. Every domination must be bought back, redeemed. This was formerly done through sacrificial death (the ritual death of the king or the leader), or even by ritual inversion (feasts and other social rites: but these are still forms of sacrifice). This social game of reversal comes to an end with the dialectic of the master and the slave, where the reversibility of power cedes its place to a dialectic of the reproduction of power. The redemption of power must always, however, be simulated, and this is done by the appara- tus of capital where formal redemption takes place throughout the immense machine of labour, wages and consumption. Economics is the sphere of redemption par excellence, where the domination of capital man- ages to redeem itself without ever really putting itself at stake. On the contrary, it diverts the process of redemption into its own infinite reproduc- tion. This is perhaps where we find the necessity of economics and its historical appearance, at the level of societies so much more vast and mobile than primitive groups, where the urgency of a system of redemption which could be measured, controlled and infinitely extended (which rituals cannot be) all at the same time, and which above all would not put the exercise and heredity of power back into question. Production and con- sumption are an original and unprecedented solution to this problem. By simulating redemption in this new form, the slide from the symbolic into Symbolic Exchange and Death64 the economic allows the definitive hegemony of political force over society to be secured. Economics miraculously succeeds in masking the real structure of power by reversing the terms of its definition. While power consists in unilateral giving (of life in particular, see above), a contrary interpretation has been successfully imposed: power would consist in a unilateral taking and appro- priation. Under cover of this ingenious retraction, real symbolic domination can continue to do as it will, since all the efforts of those under this domi- nation will rush into the trap of taking back from power what it has taken from them, even ‘taking power’ themselves, thus blindly pushing on along the lines of their domination. In fact, labour, wages, power and revolution must all be read against the grain: − labour is not exploitation, it is given by capital; − wages are not grabbed, capital gives them too – it does not buy a labour power, it buys back the power of capital;27 − the slow death of labour is not endured, it is a desperate attempt, a chal- lenge to capital’s unilateral gift of labour; − the only effective reply to power is to give it back what it gives you, and this is only symbolically possible by means of death. However, if, as we have seen, the system itself deposes economics, removes its substance and its credibility, then, in this perspective, doesn’t it put its own symbolic domination back into question? No, since the system brings about the overall reign of its power strategy, the gift without count- er-gift, which becomes fused with deferred death. The same social relations are set up in the media and in consumption, where we have seen (‘Requiem pour les Media’ [Utopie, 4, 1971]) that there is no possible response or counter-gift to the unilateral delivery of messages. We were able to interpret (CERFI’s project concerning automobile accidents) auto-slaughter as the price that the collective pays to its institutions…: the State’s gifts inscribe a ‘debt’ in the collective accounts book. Gratuitous death is then merely an attempt to absorb this deficit. The blood on the roads is a desperate form of compensation for the State’s tarmac gifts. The accident thus takes its place in the space that institutes a symbolic debt towards the State. It is likely that the more this debt grows, the more marked will be the tendency towards the accident. Every ‘rational’ strategy for curbing this phenomenon (prevention, speed limits, rescue services, repression) is effectively negligible. They simu- late the possibility of integrating the accident into a rational system, and are therefore incapable of grasping the root of the problem: balancing a symbolic debt which founds, legitimates and reinforces the collective dependency on the State. On the contrary, these ‘rational’ strategies accentuate the phenom- enon. In order to avert the effects of accidents, they propose to institute more mechanisms, more state institutions, supplementary ‘gifts’, which are simply means of aggravating the symbolic debt. In this way the struggle is everywhere opposed to a political authority (cf. Pierre Clastres, Society against the State [tr. R. Hurley and A. Stein, 65 The End of Production New York: Zone Books, 1990]), which sets all the power it can draw from its showers of gifts – the survival it maintains and the death it withdraws – above the struggle in order to stockpile and then distil it for its own ends. Nobody really accepts this bonus forever, you give what you can, 28 but power always gives more so as to serve better, and an entire society or a few individuals can go to great lengths, even their own destruction, to put an end to it. This is the only absolute weapon, and the mere collective threat of it can make power collapse. Power, faced with this symbolic ‘blackmail’ (the barricades of ’68, hostage-taking), loses its footing: since it thrives on my slow death, I will oppose it with my violent death. And it is because we are living with slow death that we dream of a violent death. Even this dream is unbearable to power. Notes 1. If it were only a question of the ascendancy of exchange-value over use-value (or the ascendancy of the structural over the functional dimension of language), then Marx and Saussure have already signalled it. Marx almost turns use-value into the medium or the alibi, pure and simple, of exchange-value. His entire analysis is based on the principle of equivalence at the core of the system of exchange-value. But if equivalence is at the core of the system, there is no indeterminacy in the global system (there is always a dialectical determinacy and finality of the mode of production). The current system, however, is itself based on indeterminacy, and draws impetus from it. Conversely, it is haunted by the death of all determinacy. 2. [See Jean Baudrillard, For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, tr. Charles Levin, St Louis, MO: Telos, 1972 – tr] 3. Theoretical production, like material production, loses its determinacy and begins to turn around itself, slipping abysally [en abyme] towards a reality that cannot be found. This is where we are today: undecidability, the era of floating theories, as much as floating money. No matter what perspective they come from (the psychoanalytic included), no matter with what violence they struggle and claim to rediscover an immanence, or a move- ment without systems of reference (Deleuze, Lyotard, etc.), all contemporary theories are floating and have no meaning other than to serve as signs for one another. It is point- less to insist on their coherence with some ‘reality’, whatever that might be. The system has removed every secure reference from theory as it has from any other labour power. Theory no longer has any use-value, the theoretical mirror of production has also cracked. So much the better. What I mean is that the very undecidability of theory is an effect of the code. Let there be no illusions: there is no schizophrenic ‘drift’ about this flotation of theories, where flows pass freely over the body without organs (of what, capital?). It merely signifies that any theory can from now on be exchanged against any other accord- ing to variable exchange rates, but without any longer being invested anywhere, unless it is the mirror of their writing. 4. [Cf. Jean-François Lyotard, Libidinal Economy, tr. I.H. Grant, London: Athlone, 1992 – tr] 5. [In English in the original – tr.] 6. [In English in the original – tr.] 7. Marx, that cunning Jesuit, was not far from recognising this with his concept of the collective labourer: The product is transformed from the direct product of the individual producer into a social product, the joint product of a collective labourer, i.e., a combination of workers, each of whom stands at a different distance from the actual manipula- tion of the object of labour. With the progressive accentuation of the co-operative Symbolic Exchange and Death66 character of the labour process, there necessarily occurs a progressive extension of the concept of productive labour, and of the concept of the bearer of that labour, the productive worker. In order to work productively, it is no longer necessary for the individual himself to put his hand to the object; it is sufficient for him to be an organ of the collective labourer, and to perform any one of its subordinate functions. The definition of productive labour given above, the original definition, is derived from the nature of material production itself, and it remains correct for the collective labourer, considered as a whole. But it no longer holds good for each member taken individually. (Capital, pp. 643–4 [J.B.’s emphases]) 8. Free time is, so to speak, a form of ‘complex labour’, in the sense that, as opposed to simple labour, it accords with the definition of service: solidarity of the prestation and the prestator, non-equivalence to a time of abstract social labour, non-equivalence to a wage which reproduces labour power. Marx would have been able to see this were he not myopically concerned with productive labour and the multiple distinctions which together tend to salvage the subject of history: the productive worker. ‘The reification of labour power, driven to perfection, would shatter the reified form by cutting the chain that ties the individual to the machinery’, writes Marcuse. ‘[Automation] would open the dimension of free time as the one in which man’s private and societal existence would constitute itself (Herbert Marcuse, One Dimensional Man [London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964], p. 37). Instead of phantasising over free time, Marcuse understood that the system, throughout the technical progress and automation, produces free time as the extreme reification of labour power, as the accomplished form of abstract social labour time, simply by being the inverted simulation of non-labour. Job training, qualification and education, etc., are other forms of complex labour. There is also a temptation to analyse them in terms of surplus-value, of the reinvestment by capital of science, training and research, of a constant capital superadded to the ordi- nary worker. Adam Smith writes: ‘A man educated at the expense of much labour and time … may be compared to one of those expensive machines’ (The Wealth of Nations [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976] Vol. 1, p. 118). This is an error. Instruction, education and training are not long-term investments. They are rather the direct social relation of domestication and control. Capital doesn’t look for any complex labour in this, but indulges in absolute waste, sacrificing an enormous part of its ‘surplus-value’ in the reproduction of its hegemony. 9. Paid unemployment already provides an example of this (one year of severance pay in France at the time of writing). In certain other countries, however, it has been replaced by a ‘negative taxation’ scheme, which provides for a basic minimum wage for all, house- wives, the handicapped, the young unemployed, to be deducted from eventual paid labour. Unemployment quite simply disappears here as a critical conjunction (with all the political implications it used to have). Labour becomes an option, while wages become a certificate of existence, an automatic inscription in the social apparatus. Capital still remains as wages, but this time in its pure form – freed from a labour (as the signifier, following Saussure’s analogy, was freed from the signified) which was only an occasional content of capital. 10. Throughout the social evolution of housing, we can see how capital’s strategy has dis- placed itself from an economic process to an extensive process. In the beginning, workers’ housing was simply a ‘dorm’, a branch of the factory, a functional site for the reproduction of labour power, a strategic site for both manufacture and business. Housing was not invested with the form of capital. Gradually, housing is invested as a space-time marked by a direct and generalised process of the control of social space. It becomes a site of reproduction, not of labour, but of the habitat itself as a specific function, as a direct form of social relation; no longer the reproduction of the worker, but of the inhabitant herself, the user. After the prole- tariat, the ‘user’ has become the ideal type of the industrial slave. The user of goods, of words, the user of sex, the user of labour herself (the worker, or the ‘agent of production’, 67 The End of Production becomes the user of the factory and of her labour as individual and collective equipment, as a social service), the user of transport, but also the user of her life and death. This decentred, extensive strategy, this all-out attack, the use or appropriation of use-value is the ultimate form of the self-management of social control. 11. Thus the Californian utopia of the cybernetic disintegration of the ‘tertiary metropolis’: home-based computer labour. Labour is pulverised into every pore of society and every- day life. As well as labour power, the space-time of labour also ceases to exist: society con- stitutes nothing but a single continuum of the processes of value. Labour has become a way of life. Nothing can reinstate the factory walls, the golden age of the factory and class struggle against the ubiquity of capital, surplus-value and labour, against their inevitable disappearance as such. The worker merely nourishes the imaginary of the struggle, just as the cop nourishes the imaginary of repression. 12. The concept of surplus-value has simply lost any meaning as regards a system which, from reproducing labour power in order to generate profit and surplus-value, has now become reproductive of life in its entirety through advanced redistribution or reinjec- tion of every equivalent of social surplus labour. From this point on, surplus-value is everywhere and nowhere. Capital no longer has any ‘incidental expenses’, nor on the other hand has it any ‘profit’ in the sense of a unilateral extortion. The law of the sys- tem requires that you give yourself up to its redistributions in order that it circulates and that each and everyone, caught in the tightly woven net of this incessant redistri- bution, might become a manager, while the whole group becomes able to manage its own surplus-value, thus implicating oneself fundamentally within the everyday politi- cal order of capital. And just as, viewed from the point of view of capital, surplus-value has lost all meaning, it has also lost all meaning from the point of view of the exploited. The distinction between a fraction of labour returning as a wage and a remainder called surplus-value has lost all meaning from the point of view of the worker who used to reproduce her labour power as a wage, but now reproduces her entire life in a generalised process of labour. 13. [Baudrillard is playing on the French term investissement, used to translate Freud’s Besestzung, rendered in English as ‘cathexis’. The French term covers the political and libidinal economic sense of ‘investment’ as well as the military sense of the ‘occupation’ of hostile territory – tr] 14. Other parallel forms of maximalist reversal: equal wages for all, the struggle against qualifications. All these forms seek the end of the division of labour (the end of labour as social relation) and the end of the law of equivalence in the field of wages and labour power, which is of fundamental importance for the system. Therefore they indirectly target the very form of political economy. 15. This same phenomenon arises in the ‘developing’ countries. There is no upper limit to the cost of raw materials once they, outside the grasp of economics, become the sign and the gauge of the acceptance of a global political order, a peaceful planetary co-existence where the developing countries are forcibly socialised under the great powers. The escalation of prices then becomes a challenge, not only to the wealth of the Western countries, but also to the political system of peaceful co-existence in the face of a single predominant global political class. Whether this class is capitalist or communist is of minor importance. Before the oil crisis, the Arabs made traditional wage demands: petrol must be sold at the right price. Now, however, these demands have turned around and become unlimited and maximal. 16. The energy crisis gave both ‘types’ of inflation an alibi and a perfect deterrent in one go. From this point on, inflation as a structural crisis internal to the system may be plausibly blamed on the ‘overvaluation’ of energy and raw materials by the countries that pro- duce them. Disaffection with the productivist system, which, amongst other things, is expressed in the maximal wage challenge, may be counteracted by the threat of poverty, that is, by threatening the use-value of the economic system itself. Symbolic Exchange and Death68 17. [See Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia I, tr. R. Hurley, M. Seem and H.R. Lane, London: Athlone, 1984, for an exposition of the ‘Deleuzian unconscious’ – tr.] 18. This intervention, however, is not exclusive of any other group deprived of social representation. When young women, high school students, homosexuals and even ‘proles’ become ‘savages’, or if we admit that basically the unions do not represent them at all, but only themselves, then we all in like manner become ‘immigrants’. On the other hand, these groups might cease to be ‘immigrants’. There are then no ‘immigrants as such’, and they do not constitute a new historical subject, a neo-proletariat who would take over as the other. 19. [Confédération générale du travail, the French Trades Union Congress – tr.] 20. [For an exposition of the Great Confinement, see Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilisation, tr. Richard Howard, London: Tavistock, 1967 – tr.] 21. As an illustration of this, we might analyse an advert for the Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP), which reads: ‘I am interested in your money – fair’s fair – lend me your money and you may profit from my bank.’ To begin with, this is the first time that capital (in its front line institution, namely international finance capital) has so clearly and openly stated the law of equivalence and, surprisingly, in the form of an advertising slogan. These things are usually unstated; commercial exchange is seen as immoral, and all publicity tries to cover this up as a matter of urgency. We may therefore be sure that this candour is a second-degree mask. Secondly, its apparent aim is to convince people on economic grounds to do themselves a good turn and take their money to the BNP. Its real strategy remains unofficial, however: to convince people by this ‘man to man’ capitalist openness, saying ‘let’s not be sentimental about this’, ‘no more of the ideology of dependence’, ‘cards on the table’, etc., and so to seduce people by means of the obscenity of revealing the hidden, immoral law of equivalence. This is a ‘macho’ complicity where men share the obscene truth of capital. Hence the smell of lechery about his advert, the salaciousness and smuttiness of the eyes glued to your money as if it were your genitals. The tech- nique used by the advert is a perverse provocation which is much more subtle than the simplistic seduction of the smile (such as was the theme of the Société Générale’s [a bank – tr.] counter-offensive: ‘It is not the banker who should smile, but the client’). People are seduced by the obscenity of the economic, taken to the level of the perverse fascination that the very atrocity of capital exercises on them. From this perspective the slogan quite simply signifies: ‘I am interested in your arse – fair’s fair – lend me your buttocks and I’ll bugger you’, which is not to everyone’s distaste. Behind the humanist morality of exchange there is a profound desire for capital, a vertiginous desire for the law of value; and this complicity, both economic and non-economic, is what the advert, perhaps without knowing it, seeks to recover, testifying to an intuition for politics. Thirdly, the advertising executives could not have been unaware that this advert, with its vampiric image, scared the middle classes, so that to emphasise their lecherous complicity with this direct attack would provoke negative reactions. Why did they take this risk? Here we have the strangest trap: the advert was made to consolidate the resist- ance to the law of profit and equivalence so as to be better able to impose the equiva- lence of capital, profit, and the economic in general (the ‘fair’s fair’) at a time when this is no longer true, when capital has displaced its strategy and so is able to state its ‘law’ since it is no longer its truth. Announcing this law is nothing more than a supplementary mystification. Capital no longer thrives on the rule of any economic law, which is why the law can be made into an advertising slogan, falling into the sphere of the sign and its manipulation. The economic is only the quantitative theatre of value. This, as well as the fact that the role of money in all this is only a pretext, is expressed by the advert in its own way. Hence the commutability of the advert itself, which can operate at every level, for example: 69 The End of Production − I am interested in your unconscious – fair’s fair – lend me your phantasies and you may profit from my analysis; − I am interested in your death – fair’s fair – take out a life insurance policy and I will make your death into a fortune; − I am interested in your productivity – fair’s fair – lend me your labour power and you may profit from my capital; and so on. This advert could serve as a ‘general equivalent’ for all real social relations. Finally, if the advert’s basic message is not equivalence, a = a, fair’s fair (no-one is fooled, as the advertising executives well know), could it be surplus-value (the fact that the operation ends up, for the banker and for capital, showing the equation: a = a + a’)? The advert can barely conceal this truth, and everyone can sense it. Capital slips in and out of the shadows here, almost unmasking itself, but it is not serious since what the advert really says comes neither from the order of quantitative equivalence, nor from surplus-value, but from the order of the tautology: not: a = a nor: a = a + a’ but: A is A That is: a bank is a bank, a banker is a banker, money is money, and you can have none of it. While pretending to state the economic law of equivalence, the advert actually states the tautological imperative, the fundamental rule of domination. For whether a bank is a bank, or indeed whether a table is a table, or whether 2 + 2 = 4 (and not 5 as Dostoyevsky had it), is the real capitalist credence. When capital says ‘I am interested in your money’, it feigns profitability in order to secure credibility. This credibility comes from the economic order (creditability), while the credence attached to the tautology sums up in itself the identity of the capitalist order and comes from the symbolic order. 22. So just as there had been (for Marx as well) a naturalist phantasy of use-value, there is for us today an economistic phantasy of exchange-value. For us, in the structural play of the code, exchange-value plays the same role as use- value used to play in the market law of value, the role of the simulacrum of reference. 23. The American Senate has gone to the extent of calculating what it would cost to bring water back to the purity it had before the European conquest of the Americas (the ‘1491 standard’, Christopher Columbus having landed, as we know, in 1492): $350 million. These millions matter little, however, since what the Senators are in fact calculating is the cost of bringing the system itself back to the original purity of primitive accumulation, the golden age of labour power. The 1890, or indeed 1840, standard? In like fashion, the current monetary system dreams of gold and a gold standard to stabilise and regenerate fiduciary values. The current state of affairs is that free and unlim- ited speculation on the grounds of the loss of the gold-referent edges closer every moment to catastrophe: an arbitrariness and an inflation of such proportions that the authority of money itself is toppled and loses all its credibility. Again we have a cyclical regeneration by means of reference; a ‘critical’ regeneration is necessary in order to prevent financial exchanges from reaching the limits of unreality, where they would be destroyed. 24. There are, of course, contradictions remaining between the structural and the market law of value, just as, in a previous phase, there were between the law of the market and resistant pre-capitalist values (which contradictions have not completely disappeared). In this way, the ultimate end of the system is the control of death: death is one of the structural markings of life, it also clashes with economic imperatives and a traditional logic of profit (the enormous cost of long-term care, hospitalisation, and so on). A com- promise results from this, an absurd equilibrium (we can afford to keep 35 per cent of all leukaemia sufferers alive). Assessing the marginal costs of death. Anything above this level and we let them die. But this is not cynical economics, on the contrary, the econ- omy prevents the system from following the conclusions of its own logic and barring people’s access to death. Symbolic Exchange and Death70 There is in fact a constant play between the two forms of value, controlled by a strat- egy aiming at intensifying the crisis. And although the crisis seems to require a solution, it is this solution already. 25. The gift, under the sign of gift-exchange, has been made into the distinguishing mark of primitive ‘economies’, and at the same time into the alternative principle to the law of value and political economy. There is no worse mystification. The gift is our myth, the idealist myth correlative to our materialist myth, and we bury the primitives under both myths at the same time. The primitive symbolic process knows nothing of the gratuity of the gift, it knows only the challenge and the reversibility of exchanges. When this revers- ibility is broken, precisely by the unilateral possibility of giving (which presupposes the possibility of stockpiling value and transferring it in one direction only), then the properly symbolic relation is dead and power makes an appearance: it will merely be deployed thereafter throughout the economic apparatus of the contract. It is our (operational) fic- tion, our metaphysics, the idea that it is possible to accumulate stock-value in its head (capital), to make it increase and multiply: this is the trap of the accumulation and capital. It is equally our fiction, however, to think that we may relinquish it absolutely (with the gift). The primitives know that this possibility does not exist, that the arresting of value on one term, the very possibility of isolating a segment of exchange, one side of the exchange, is unthinkable, that everything has a compensation, not in the contractual sense, but in the sense that the process of exchange is unavoidably reversible. They base all their relations on this incessant backfire, ambivalence and death in exchange, whereas we base our order on the possibility of separating two distinct poles of exchange and making them autonomous. There follows either the equivalent exchange (the contract) or the inequivalent exchange that has no compensation (the gift). But both, as we shall see, obey the same dislocation of the process and the same autonomisation of value. 26. This is no doubt especially true in the phase of physical abjection and savage exploitation, in capitalist ‘prostitution’ under the market law of value. How much of this remains in our phase, the structural law of value? 27. This is particularly clear when wages are unilaterally bestowed, imposed in ‘negative taxation’ without any labour in return. The wage-earner without equivalence: in this trans-economic contract, we see a pure domination and pure subservience to the gift and the premium emerge. 28. That is symbolic exchange. We must emphasise that it stands opposed to the entire liberal or Christian humanist ideology of the gift. The gift is the source and even the essence of power. Only the counter-gift, the reversibility of symbolic exchange, abolishes power. 2 The Order of Simulacra The Three Orders of Simulacra There are three orders of simulacra, running parallel to the successive mutations of the law of value since the Renaissance: − The counterfeit is the dominant schema in the ‘classical’ period, from the Renaissance to the Industrial Revolution. − Production is the dominant schema in the industrial era. − Simulation is the dominant schema in the current code-governed phase. The first-order simulacrum operates on the natural law of value, the second- order simulacrum on the market law of value, and the third-order simulacrum on the structural law of value. The Stucco Angel The counterfeit (and, simultaneously, fashion) is born with the Renaissance, with the destructuration of the feudal order by the bourgeois order and the emergence of overt competition at the level of signs of distinction. There is no fashion in a caste society, nor in a society based on rank, since assignation is absolute and there is no class mobility. Signs are protected by a prohibi- tion which ensures their total clarity and confers an unequivocal status on each. Counterfeit is not possible in the ceremonial, unless in the form of black magic and sacrilege, which is precisely what makes the mixing of signs punishable as a serious offence against the very order of things. If we take to dreaming once more – particularly today – of a world where signs are certain, of a strong ‘symbolic order’, let’s be under no illusions. For this order has existed, and it was a brutal hierarchy, since the sign’s transparency is indissociably also its cruelty. In feudal or archaic caste societies, in cruel societies, signs are limited in number and their circulation is restricted. Each retains its full value as a prohibition, and each carries with it a reciprocal obligation between castes, clans or persons, so signs are not arbitrary. The arbitrariness of the sign begins when, instead of bonding two persons in an inescapable reciprocity, the signifier starts to refer to a disenchanted uni- verse of the signified, the common denominator of the real world, towards which no-one any longer has the least obligation. The end of the obligatory sign is succeeded by the reign of the emanci- pated sign, in which any and every class will be able to participate. Symbolic Exchange and Death72 Competitive democracy succeeds the endogamy of signs proper to status-based orders. With the transit of values or signs of prestige from one class to another, we simultaneously and necessarily enter into the age of the counterfeit. For from a limited order of signs, the ‘free’ production of which is prevented by a prohibition, we pass into a proliferation of signs according to demand. These multiple signs, however, no longer have anything to do with the restricted circulation of the obligatory sign, but counterfeit the latter. Counterfeiting does not take place by means of changing the nature of an ‘original’, but, by extension, through com- pletely altering a material whose clarity is completely dependent upon a restriction. Non-discriminatory (the sign is nothing any longer if not competitive), relieved of every constraint, universally available, the mod- ern sign nevertheless still simulates necessity by giving the appearance that it is bound to the world. The modern sign dreams of its predecessor, and would dearly love to rediscover an obligation in its reference to the real. It finds only a reason, a referential reason, a real and a ‘natural’ on which it will feed. This designatory bond, however, is only a simulacrum of symbolic obligation, producing nothing more than neutral values which are exchanged one for the other in an objective world. Here the sign suffers the same fate as labour, for just as the ‘free’ worker is only free to produce equivalents, the ‘free and emancipated’ sign is only free to produce equivalent signifieds. The modern sign then finds its value as the simulacrum of a ‘nature’. This problematic of the ‘natural’ and the metaphysics of reality was, for the bour- geoisie since the Renaissance, the mirror of both the bourgeois and the classical sign. Even today there is a thriving nostalgia for the natural referent of the sign, despite several revolutions which have begun to shatter this configuration (such as the revolution of production when signs ceased to refer to a nature and referred instead to the law of exchange, passing into the market law of value). We will come back to these second-order simulacra. It is with the Renaissance, then, that the forgery is born along with the natural, ranging from the deceptive finery on people’s backs to the pros- thetic fork, from the stucco interiors to Baroque theatrical scenery. The entire classical era was the age of the theatre par excellence. The theatre is a form that gripped social life in its entirety as well as all architecture from the Renaissance on. From these incredible achievements with stucco and Baroque art we can unravel the metaphysics of the counterfeit, as well as the new ambitions of Renaissance man. These latter consist in an earthly demiurgy, the transubstantiation of all nature into a single substance, a the- atrical sociality unified under the sign of bourgeois values, beyond differences of blood, rank or caste. Stucco is the triumphant democracy of all artificial signs, the apotheosis of the theatre and fashion, revealing the unlimited potential of the new class, as soon as it was able to end the sign’s exclusivity. The way is clear for unheard of combinations, for every game, every counterfeit – the Promethean designs of the bourgeoisie are first engrossed in the imitation of nature, before it throws itself into production. 73 The Order of Simulacra In the churches and palaces, stucco embraces all forms, imitates all materi- als: velvet curtains, wooden cornices, and fleshy curves of the body. Stucco transfigures all this incredible material disorder into a single new substance, a sort of general equivalent for all the others, accruing a theatrical prestige, since it is itself a representative substance, a mirror of all the others. But simulacra do not consist only of the play of signs, they involve social relations and a social power. Stucco may appear to be extolling the expansion of science and technology, but it is also and especially bound to the Baroque, which is in turn bound to the matter of the Counter-Reformation and to the hegemony of the political and mental world which, for the first time, the Jesuits tried to institute in accordance with a modern conception of power. There is a direct relation between the Jesuits’ mental obedience (perinde ac cadaver) and the demiurgic ambition to exorcise the natural substance of things in order to replace it with a synthetic substance. Just as man sub- mits to organisation, so things take on the ideal functionality of the corpse. Technology and technocracy are already fully operative in the notion of an ideal counterfeit of the world, expressed in the invention of a universal substance and a universal combinatory of substances. To reunify the world, split asunder after the Reformation, under a homogeneous doctrine, to universalise the world under a single word (from New Spain to Japan: the Missions), to constitute a State political élite with one and the same cen- tralised strategy: such are the Jesuits’ objectives. To do this, they will need to create efficient simulacra, such as the organisation’s apparatus, as well as bureaucratic, theatrical (the great theatre of the Cardinals and the Grey Eminences), training and educational machinery, which aims, for the first time in a systematic fashion, to fashion an ideal nature on the model of the child. The stucco cladding of Baroque architecture is a major apparatus of the same order. All this issues from the productivist rationality of capital, but it already bears witness, not in production but in the counterfeit, to the same project of universal control and hegemony, to a social schema in whose foundations the internal coherence of a system already operates. In the Ardennes there used to live an old cook for whom the construction of tiered cakes and the science of pâtissrie-sculpture had given him the arro- gance to attempt to capture the world as God had left it (that is, in its natural state), to eliminate all its organic spontaneity and replace it with a single polymorphous material: reinforced concrete. Concrete furniture, chairs, chests of drawers, concrete sewing machines; and outside, in the courtyard, an entire orchestra, including the violins, in concrete. Everything in concrete! Concrete trees planted out with genuine leaves, a reinforced concrete boar with a real boar’s skull inside it, concrete sheep covered in real wool. At last Camille Renault discovered the original substance, the pastry from which the diversity of things are distinguished solely by ‘realistic’ nuances such as the boar’s skull and the leaves on the trees. Doubtless, however, this was only a concession from the demiurge to his visitors, for it was with a delighted smile that this good eighty-year-old god welcomed them to his creation. He sought no quarrel with divine creation, he simply Symbolic Exchange and Death74 remodelled it in order to make it more intelligible. There was no Luciferian revolt, no will-to-parody, nor a partisan and retro affinity with ‘naïve’ art. The Ardennes cook simply reigned over a unified mental substance (for concrete is a mental substance: like the concept, it enables phenomena to be ordered and separated at will). His project was not so far removed from the stucco builders of Baroque art, nor very different from projecting an urban community on to the terrain of a large contemporary group. The counterfeit still only works on substance and form, not yet on relations and structures, but at this level, it is already aiming at control of a pacified soci- ety, cast in a synthetic substance which evades death, an indestructible artifact that will guarantee eternal power. Isn’t it a miracle that with plas- tics, man has invented an undegradable matter, thus interrupting the cycle which through corruption and death reverses each and every substance on the earth into another? Even fire leaves an indestructible residue of this substance outside the cycle. Here is something we did not expect: a simu- lacrum in which the project of a universal semiotics is condensed. This has no longer anything to do with the ‘progress’ of technology or the rational aims of science. It is a project which aims at political and mental hegemony, the phantasy of a closed mental substance like the Baroque stucco angels whose wing-tips touch in a curved mirror. The Automaton and the Robot A world separates these two artificial beings. One is the theatrical mechan- ical and clockwork counterfeit of man where the technique is to submit everything to analogy and to the simulacrum-effect. The other is dominated by a technical principle where the machine has the upper hand, and where, with the machine, equivalence is established. The automaton plays the man of the court, the socialite, it takes part in the social and theatrical drama of pre-Revolutionary France. As for the robot, as its name implies, it works; end of the theatre, beginning of human mechanics. The automaton is the analogon of man and remains responsive to him (even playing draughts with him!). The machine is the equivalent of man, appropriating him to itself as an equal in the unity of a functional process. This sums up the dif- ference between first- and second-order simulacra. We must not be fooled by ‘figurative’ resemblance. Like God, the automaton questions nature (if not the mystery of the soul), the dilemma of being and appearance: what underlies nature; what is within us; what is behind appearances? Only the counterfeit of man allows these questions to be asked. Every metaphysics of man as the protagonist in the natural theatre of creation is embodied in the automaton before disappearing with the French Revolution, and the automaton has no other destiny than to be compared with the living man – with the aim of being more natural than him – whose ideal image the automaton is. The automaton is man’s perfect double, even down to the subtlety of its gestures, in the workings of its 75 The Order of Simulacra organs and intelligence, almost inducing anxiety when we perceive that there is no difference between them, and that therefore the automaton has no need of a soul since it possesses an ideally naturalised body. Because this would be sacrilege, the difference between them is still maintained, as in the case of an automaton so perfect that on stage the illusionist mimicked its staccato movements in order that at least, even if the roles were reversed, confusion would be impossible. Thus the automaton’s questions remain open, making it an optimistic mechanics, even if the counterfeit always retains a diabolical connotation.1 There is nothing like this with the robot. The robot no longer questions appearances, its only truth is its mechanical efficiency. It no longer needs to resemble man, to whom it is inevitably compared. The infamous metaphys- ical difference which gives the automaton mystery and charm no longer exists: the robot emphasises this difference for its own benefit. Being and appearance are founded on a single substance of production and labour. The first-order simulacrum never abolishes the difference: it presupposes the dispute always in evidence between the simulacrum and the real (a partic- ularly subtle game in trompe-l’oeil painting, but all art thrives on this difference). The second-order simulacrum simplifies the problem by the absorption of appearances, or by the liquidation of the real, whichever you prefer. In any case it erects a reality without images, without echo, without mirrors, without appearances: such indeed is labour, such is the machine, such is the entire industrial system of production in that it is radically opposed to the principle of theatrical illusion. No more semblance or dis- semblance, no more God or Man, only an immanent logic of the principle of operativity. After this, robots and machines can proliferate – this is even their law – as automata, being sublime and singular mechanisms, have never done. Men themselves only began to proliferate when, with the Industrial Revolution, they took on the status of machines: freed of all semblance, freed even from their double, they grew increasingly similar to the system of production of which they were nothing more than the miniaturised equivalent. The sim- ulacrum’s revenge, which gave rise to the myth of the sorcerer’s apprentice, did not take place with the automaton; on the contrary, this is the law of the second order, from which there still proceeds a hegemony of the robot, of the machine, of dead labour over living labour. This hegemony is neces- sary to the cycle of production and reproduction. It is with this reversal that we leave the counterfeit in order to enter into (re)production. We are leav- ing natural law and its play of forms in order to enter the market law of value and its calculations of forces. The Industrial Simulacrum A new generation of signs and objects arises with the Industrial Revolution – signs with no caste tradition that will never have known restrictions on their Symbolic Exchange and Death76 status, and which will never have to be counterfeits, since from the outset they will be products on a gigantic scale. The problem of their specificity and their origin is no longer posed: technics is their origin, they have meaning only within the dimension of the industrial simulacrum. That is, the series: the very possibility of two or n identical objects. The relation between them is no longer one of an original and its counterfeit, analogy or reflection, but is instead one of equivalence and indifference. In the series, objects become indistinct simulacra of one another and, along with objects, of the men that produce them. The extinction of the original reference alone facilitates the general law of equivalences, that is to say, the very possibility of production. The entire analysis of production will be swept aside if we stop regarding it as an original process, as the process at the origin of all the others, but conversely as a process which reabsorbs every original being and introduces a series of identical beings. Up to this point, we have considered production and labour as potential, as force and historical process, as a generic activity: an energetic-economic myth proper to modernity. We must ask ourselves whether production is not rather an intervention, a particular phase, in the order of signs – whether it is basically only one episode in the line of simu- lacra, that episode of producing an infinite series of potentially identical beings (object-signs) by means of technics. The fabulous energies at work in technics, industry and economics should not hide the fact that it is at bottom only a matter of attaining this indefinite reproducibility, which is a definite challenge to the ‘natural’ order, and ultimately only a ‘second-order’ simulacrum and a somewhat weak imaginary solution to the question of world mastery. In relation to the era of the counterfeit, the double, the mirror and the theatre, games of masks and appearances, the serial and technical era of reproduction is basi- cally an era of less ambitious scope (the following era of simulation models and third-order simulacra is of much more considerable dimensions). Walter Benjamin, in ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’ [in Illuminations, tr. Harry Zohn, ed. Hannah Arendt, London: Jonathan Cape, 1970], was the first to draw out the essential implications of the principle of reproduction. He shows that reproduction absorbs the process of production, changes its goals, and alters the status of the product and the producer. He shows this in the fields of art, cinema and photography, because it is there that new territories are opened up in the twentieth century, with no ‘classical’ tradition of productivity, placed from the outset under the sign of reproduction. Today, however, we know that all material production remains within the same sphere. Today we know that it is at the level of reproduction (fashion, the media, advertising, informa- tion and communications networks), at the level of what Marx rather carelessly used to call the faux frais of capital (immense historical irony!), that is, in the sphere of simulacra and the code, that the unity of the whole process of capital is formed. Benjamin was also the first (with McLuhan after him) to grasp technology as a medium rather than a ‘productive force’ 77 The Order of Simulacra (at which point the Marxian analysis retreats), as the form and principle of an entirely new generation of meaning. The mere fact that any given thing can simply be reproduced, as such, in an exemplary double is already a revolution: one need only think of the stupefaction of the Black boy seeing two identical books for the first time. That these two technical products are equivalent under the sign of necessary social labour is less important in the long term than the serial repetition of the same object (which is also the serial repetition of individuals as labour power). Technique as a medium gains the upper hand not only over the product’s ‘message’ (its use-value) but also over labour power, which Marx wanted to turn into the revolution- ary message of production. Benjamin and McLuhan saw more clearly than Marx, they saw that the real message, the real ultimatum, lay in reproduction itself. Production itself has no meaning: its social finality is lost in the series. Simulacra prevail over history. Moreover, the stage of serial reproduction (that of the industrial mecha- nism, the production line, the growth of reproduction, etc.) is ephemeral. As soon as dead labour gains the upper hand over living labour (that is to say, since the end of primitive accumulation), serial production gives way to generation through models. In this case it is a matter of a reversal of origin and end, since all forms change from the moment that they are no longer mechanically reproduced, but conceived according to their very repro- ducibility, their diffraction from a generative core called a ‘model’. We are dealing with third-order simulacra here. There is no more counterfeiting of an original, as there was in the first order, and no more pure series as there were in the second; there are models from which all forms proceed accord- ing to modulated differences. Only affiliation to the model has any meaning, since nothing proceeds in accordance with its end any more, but issues instead from the model, the ‘signifier of reference’, functioning as a fore- gone, and the only credible, conclusion. We are dealing with simulation in the modern sense of the term, where industrialisation is only its initial form. Modulation is ultimately more fundamental than serial reproducibility, distinct oppositions more than quantitative equivalences, and the commu- tation of terms more than the law of equivalences; the structural, not the market, law of value. Not only do we not need to search for the secrets of the code in technique or economics, it is on the contrary the very possibil- ity of industrial production that we must seek in the genesis of the code and the simulacrum. Every order subsumes the previous order. Just as the order of the counterfeit was captured by the order of serial reproduction (look at how art passed entirely into ‘machinality’), so the entire order of produc- tion is in the process of toppling into operational simulation. The analyses of both Benjamin and McLuhan stand on the borders of reproduction and simulation, at the point where referential reason disap- pears and production is seized by vertigo. These analyses mark a decisive advance over Veblen and Goblot, who, describing, for example, the signs of fashion still refer to a classical configuration where signs constitute a dis- tinct material having a finality and are used for prestige, status and social Symbolic Exchange and Death78 differentiation. The strategy they deploy is contemporaneous with Marx’s strategy of profit and commodity, at a moment where they could still speak of a use-value of the sign, or quite simply of economics at all, because there was still a Reason of the sign and a Reason of production. The Metaphysics of the Code The mathematically minded Leibniz saw in the mystical elegance of the binary system where only the zero and the one count, the very image of creation. The unity of the Supreme Being, operating by means of a binary function against the nothing, was sufficient ground, he thought, from which all things could be made. Marshall McLuhan The great man-made simulacra pass from a universe of natural laws into a universe of forces and tensions, and today pass into a universe of structures and binary oppositions. After the metaphysics of being and appearance, after energy and determinacy, the metaphysics of indeterminacy and the code. Cybernetic control, generation through models, differential modulation, feedback, question/answer, etc.: this is the new operational configuration (industrial simulacra being mere operations). Digitality is its metaphysical principle (Leibniz’s God), and DNA is its prophet. In fact, it is in the genetic code that the ‘genesis of simulacra’ today finds its completed form. At the limits of an ever more forceful extermination of references and finalities, of a loss of semblances and designators, we find the digital, programmatic sign, which has a purely tactical value, at the intersection of other signals (‘bits’ of information/tests) and which has the structure of a micro-molecular code of command and control. At this level, the question of signs and their rational destinations, their ‘real’ and their ‘imaginary’, their repression, reversal, the illusions they form of what they silence or of their parallel significations, is completely effaced. We have already seen the signs of the first order, complex signs with a wealth of illusion, change with the advent of machines into crude, dull, industrial, repetitive, echoless, functional and efficient signs. There is a still more radical mutation as regards the code’s signals, which become illegible, and for which no possible interpretation can be provided, buried like programmatic matrices, light years, ultimately, from the ‘biological’ body, black boxes where every command and response are in ferment. End of the theatre of representation, the space of the conflicts and silences of the sign: only the black box of the code remains, the molecule emitting signals which irradiate us, networking questions/answers through us as identifying signals, and continuously tested by the programme we have hardwired into our own cells. Whether it is prison cells, electronic cells, party cells or microbiological cells we are dealing with, we are always searching for the smallest indivisible element, the organic synthesis of which will follow in accordance with the givens of the code. The code 79 The Order of Simulacra itself is nothing other than a genetic, generative cell where the myriad intersections produce all the questions and all the possible solutions from which to select (for whom?). There is no finality to these ‘questions’ (informational signals, impulses) other than the response which is either genetic and immutable or inflected with minuscule and aleatory differences. Even space is no longer linear or unidimensional but cellular, indefinitely generating the same signals like the lonely and repetitive habits of a stir- crazy prisoner. The genetic code is the perpetual jump in a floppy disk, and we are nothing more than VDUs [cellules de lecture]. The whole aura of the sign and signification itself is determinately resolved: everything is resolved into inscription and decoding. Such is our third-order simulacrum, such is the ‘mystical elegance of the binary system of zero and one’, from which all beings issue. Such also is the status of the sign at the end of signification: DNA or operational simulation. This is all perfectly summed up by Thomas Sebeok in ‘Genetics and Semiotics’ (Versus): Innumerable observations confirm the hypothesis that the internal world of the organic descends directly from the primordial forms of life. The most remarkable fact is the omnipresence of the DNA molecule. The genetic mate- rial of all the earth’s known organisms is in large part composed of the nucleic acids DNA and RNA, whose structure contains information transmitted through reproduction from one generation to the next, and furthermore endowed with the capacity to reproduce itself and to imitate. In short, the genetic code is universal, or almost. Decoding it was an immense discovery to the extent that it showed that ‘the two languages of the great polymers, the languages of nucleic acid and protein, correlate directly’ … The Soviet math- ematician Liapunov demonstrated in 1963 that every living system transmits a small but precise quantity of energy or matter containing a great volume of information through channels laid down in advance. This information is responsible for the subsequent control of large quantities of energy and mat- ter. From this perspective numerous biological and cultural phenomena (storing, feedback, channelling messages and so on) can be conceived as man- ifestations of information processing. In the final analysis, information appears in large part to be the repetition of information, but still another kind of information, a kind of control which seems to be a universal property of ter- restrial life, irrespective of its form or substance. Five years ago I drew attention to the convergence of genetics and linguistics as autonomous but parallel disciplines in the larger field of the science of communication (which is also a part of zoosemiotics). The terminology of genetics is full of expressions taken from linguistics and communication theory …, which emphasised both the principal similarities and the important differences in the structure and function of genetic and verbal codes … Today it is clear that the genetic code must be considered as the most basic semiotic network, and therefore as the prototype of all the other systems of significa- tion used by the animals, including man. From this point of view, molecules, which are systems of quanta of, and which act as stable vehicles of physical information, zoosemiotic and cultural systems including language, constitute a continuous chain of stages, with ever more complex energy levels, in the context of a unique and universal evolution. It is therefore possible to describe both language or living systems from a unifying cybernetic point Symbolic Exchange and Death80 of view. For the moment, this is only a useful and provisional analogy. … A reciprocal rapprochement between genetics, animal communication and linguistics may lead to a complete science of the dynamics of semiosis, which science may turn out, in the final analysis, to be nothing other than a definition of life. So the outline of the current strategic model emerges, everywhere taking over from the great ideological model which political economy was in its time. We find this again, under the rigorous sign of ‘science’, in Jacques Monod’s Chance and Necessity [tr. Austyn Wainhouse, London: Collins, 1970]. The end of dialectical evolution. Life is now ruled by the discontin- uous indeterminacy of the genetic code, by the teleonomic principle. Finality is no longer at the end, there is no more finality, nor any determinacy. Finality is there in advance, inscribed in the code. We can see that nothing has changed – the order of ends has ceded its place to molecular play, as the order of signifieds has yielded to the play of infinitesimal signifiers, con- densed into their aleatory commutation. All the transcendental finalities are reduced to an instrument panel. This is still to make recourse to nature however, to an inscription in a ‘biological’ nature; a phantasm of nature in fact, as it has always been, no longer a metaphysical sanctuary for the origin and substance, but this time, for the code. The code must have an ‘objective’ basis. What better than molecules and genetics? Monod is the strict theolo- gian of this molecular transcendence, Edgar Morin its ecstatic supporter (DNA = ADoNaï!). In each of them, however, the phantasm of the code, which is equivalent to the reality of power, is confused with the idealism of the molecule. Again we find the hallucination or illusion of a world reunited under a single principle – a homogeneous substance according to the Counter- Reformation Jesuits. With Leibniz and his binary deity as their precursor, the technocrats of the biological (as well as the linguistic) sciences opt for the genetic code, for their intended programme has nothing to do with genetics, but is a social and historical programme. Biochemistry hypostatises the ideal of a social order governed by a kind of genetic code, a macromo- lecular calculus by the PPBS (Planning Programming Budgeting System), its operational circuits radiating over the social body. Here techno-cybernetics finds its ‘natural philosophy’, as Monod said. The biological and the bio- chemical have always exerted a fascination, ever since the beginnings of science. In Spencer’s organicism (bio-sociologism) it was operative at the level of second and third order structures (following Jacob’s classification in The Logic of Life [Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1989]), while today, in modern biochemistry, this applies to the level of fourth-order structures. Coded similarities and dissimilarities: the exact image of cyberneti- cised social exchange. We need only add the ‘stereospecific complex’ to reinject the intracellular communication that Morin will transform into a molecular Eros. Practically and historically, this means that social control by means of the end (and the more or less dialectical providence that ministers to the 81 The Order of Simulacra fulfilment of this end) is replaced with social control by means of predic- tion, simulation, programmed anticipation and indeterminate mutation, all governed, however, by the code. Instead of a process finalised in accor- dance with its ideal development, we are dealing with generative models. Instead of prophecy, we fall subject to ‘inscription’. There is no radical difference between the two. Only the schemata of control change and, it has to be said, reach a fantastic degree of perfection. From a capitalist productivist society to a neo-capitalist cybernetic order, aiming this time at absolute control: the biological theory of the code has taken up arms in the service of this mutation. Far from ‘indeterminate’, this mutation is the outcome of an entire history where God, Man, Progress and even History have successively passed away to the advantage of the code, where the death of transcendence benefits immanence, which corresponds to a far more advanced phase of the vertiginous manipulation of social relations. In its infinite reproduction, the system puts an end to the myth of its origin and to all the referential values it has itself secreted in the course of its process. By putting an end to the myth of its origin, it puts an end to its internal contradictions (there is no longer a real or a referential to which to oppose them) and also puts an end to the myth of its end, the revolution itself. With the revolution you could still make out the outline of a victori- ous human and generic reference, the original potential of man. But what if capital wiped generic man himself off the map (in favour of genetic man)? The revolution’s golden age was the age of capital, where myths of the origin and the end were still in circulation. Once these myths were short-circuited (the only threat that capital had ever faced historically came from this mythical demand for rationality which pervaded it from the start) in a de facto operationality, a non-discursive operationality – once it became its own myth, or rather an indeterminate, aleatory machine, something like a social genetic code – capital no longer left the slightest opportunity for a determinate reversal. This is the real violence of capital. However, it remains to be seen whether this operationality is itself a myth, whether DNA is itself a myth. This effectively poses the problem of the discursive status of science once and for all. In Monod, this discourse is so candidly absolutised that it provides a perfect opportunity for posing the problem: Plato, Heraclitus, Hegel, Marx …: these ideological edifices, represented as a priori, were in reality a posteriori constructions designed to justify precon- ceived ethico-political theories. … For science, objectivity is the only a priori postulate of objectivity, which spares, or rather forbids it from taking part in this debate. [Chance and Necessity, p. 98] However, this postulate is itself a result of the never innocent decision to objectify the world and the ‘real’. In fact, it postulates the coherence of a specific discourse, and scientificity is doubtless only the space of this dis- course, never manifest as such, whose simulacrum of ‘objectivity’ covers over this political and strategic speech. Besides, Monod clearly expresses the arbitrariness of this discourse a little further on: Symbolic Exchange and Death82 It may be asked, of course, whether all the invariants, conservations and symmetries that make up the texture of scientific discourse are not fictions substituted for reality in order to obtain a workable image. … A logic itself founded upon a purely abstract, perhaps ‘conventional’, principle of identity – a convention with which, however, human reason seems to be incapable of doing without. [ibid., p. 99] We couldn’t put it more clearly: science itself determines its generative formula and its discourse model on the basis of a faith in a conventional order (and moreover not just any order, but the order of a total reduction). But Monod quickly glosses over this dangerous hypothesis of ‘conventional’ identity. A rigid basis would serve science better, an ‘objective’ reality for example. Physics will testify that identity is not only a postulate, but that it is in things, since there is an ‘absolute identity of two atoms when they are found to be in the same quantitative state’. So, is it convention or is it objec- tive reality? The truth is that science, like any other discourse, is organised on the basis of a conventional logic, but, like any other ideological discourse, requires a real, ‘objective’ reference within the processes of substance in order to justify it. If the principle of identity is in any way ‘true’, even if this is at the infinitesimal level of two atoms, then the entire conventional edifice of science which draws its inspiration from it is also ‘true’. The hypothesis of the genetic code DNA is also true and cannot be defeated. The same goes for metaphysics. Science explains things which have been defined and for- malised in advance and which subsequently conform to these explanations, that’s all that ‘objectivity’ is. The ethics that come to sanction this objective knowledge are just systems of defence and misconstrual [méconnaissance] that aim to preserve this vicious circle. 2 As Nietzsche said: ‘Down with all hypotheses that have allowed belief in a real world.’ The Tactile and the Digital Regulation on the model of the genetic code is in no way limited to effects in the laboratory or the exalted visions of theoreticians: these models invest life at its most banal level. Digitality is among us. It haunts all the messages and signs of our society, and we can clearly locate its most concrete form in the test, the question/answer, the stimulus/response. All content is neu- tralised by a continuous process of orchestrated interrogations, verdicts and ultimatums to be decoded, which this time no longer come from the depths of the genetic code but still possess the same tactical indeterminacy – the cycles of meaning become infinitely shorter in the cycles of the question/ answer, the bit or the return of a minuscule quantity of energy/information to its point of departure. This cycle merely describes the perpetual reactu- alisation of the same models. The equivalent of the total neutralisation of signifieds by the code is the instantaneous verdict of fashion or of every billboard or TV advertising message. Everywhere supply devours demand, the question devours the answer, either absorbing and regurgitating it in a 83 The Order of Simulacra decodable form, or inventing it and anticipating its predictable corrobora- tion. Everywhere the same ‘scenario’ of ‘trials and errors’ (the burden of which, in laboratory tests, is borne by guinea-pigs), the scenario of the spectrum of choices on offer or the multiple choice (‘test your personality’). The test is everywhere the fundamental social form of control, which works by infinitely dividing practices and responses. We live in a referendum mode precisely because there is no longer any referential. Every sign and every message (objects of ‘functional’ utility just as much as fashion features or any televised information, polls or discussions) is presented to us as a question/answer. The entire communi- cations system has passed from a complex syntactic structure of language to a binary system of question/answer signals – perpetual testing. Tests and referenda are, as we know, perfect forms of simulation: the question induces the answer, it is designated in advance. The referendum, then, is only an ultimatum: the unilateral question is precisely not an interrogation any more, but the immediate imposition of a meaning which simultane- ously completes the cycle. Every message is a verdict, delivered like the verdict of polling statistics. The simulacrum of distance (or indeed of contradiction) between the two poles is nothing but a tactical hallucination, like the reality effect on the interior of the sign itself. Benjamin provides this test-function at the concrete level of the technical apparatus: The artistic performance of the screen actor is presented by a camera, with a twofold consequence. The camera that presents the performance of the film actor to the public need not respect the performance as an integral whole. Guided by the camera-man, the camera continually changes its posi- tion with respect to the performance. The sequence of positional views which the editor composes with the material supplied him constitutes the completed film … Hence, the performance of the actor is subjected to a series of optical tests. This is the first consequence of the fact that the actor’s performance is presented by means of the camera. Also, the film actor lacks the opportunity of the stage actor to adjust to the audience during the per- formance, since he does not present his performance to the audience in person. This permits the audience to take the position of the critic, without experiencing any personal contact with the actor. The audience’s identifica- tion with the actor is really an identification with the camera. Consequently the audience takes the position of the camera; its approach is that of testing. [Note:] The expansion of the field of the testable which mechanical equip- ment brings about for the actor corresponds to the extraordinary expansion of the field of the testable brought about for the individual through eco- nomic conditions. Thus, vocational aptitude tests become constantly more important. What matters in these tests are segmental performances of the individual. The film shot and the vocational aptitude test are taken before a committee of experts. The camera director in the studio occupies a place identical with that of the examiner during aptitude tests. [T]he work of art of the Dadaists became an instrument of ballistics. It hit the spectator like a bullet, it happened to him, thus acquiring a tactile quality. Symbolic Exchange and Death84 It promoted a demand for the film, the distracting element of which is also primarily tactile, being based on changes of place and focus which periodi- cally assail the spectator. (‘The Work of Art’, pp. 230, 240) Contemplation is impossible, images fragment perception into successive sequences and stimuli to which the only response is an instantaneous yes or no – reaction time is maximally reduced. The film no longer allows you to contemplate it, it interrogates you directly. According to McLuhan, it is in this sense that the modern media demand greater immediate participation,3 incessant response and total plasticity (Benjamin compares the camera- man’s operation to the surgeon’s: tactility and manipulation). Messages no longer have an informational role, they test and take polls, ultimately so as to control (‘contra-role’ in the sense that all your responses are already inscribed in the ‘role’, on the anticipated register of the code). Editing [montage] and encoding in fact demand that the recipient dismantle [démonte] and decode in accordance with the same process. Every reading of a message is thus nothing more than a perpetual test of the code. Every image, every media message and also every surrounding functional object is a test. That is to say, in all the rigour of the term, it triggers response mechanisms in accordance with stereotypes or analytic models. The object today is no longer ‘functional’ in the traditional sense of the term; it doesn’t serve you, it tests you. It no longer has anything to do with yesterday’s object, any more than ‘mediatised’ information has with the ‘reality’ of facts. Both object and information already result from a selection, an edited sequence of camera angles, they have already tested ‘reality’ and have only asked those questions to which it has responded. Reality has been analysed into simple elements which have been recomposed into scenarios of stable oppositions, just as the photographer imposes his own contrasts, lighting and angles onto his subject (any photographer will tell you that no matter what you do it is enough to catch the original from a good angle at the moment or inflection that turns it into the exact response to the instantaneous test of the apparatus and its code); exactly like the test or referendum when they translate a given conflict or problem into a question/answer game. Thus tested, reality tests you in return according to the same score-card, and you decode it following the same code, inscribed in its every message and object like a miniature genetic code. You already test the mere fact that everything is presented today according to a spectrum or range, since it imposes selectivity on you. This conforms to the global usage we have of the surrounding world of reading and selective decoding – we live less as users than as readers and selectors, reading cells. But beware, since by the same token you are yourself con- stantly selected and tested by the medium itself. Just as we select a sample for purposes of a survey, the media frame and cut sample receivers by means of beamed messages which are in fact a network of selected ques- tions. By a circular operation of experimental modifications and incessant interference, like nervous, tactile and retractile impulses, probing an object by means of short perceptual sequences until it has been localised and 85 The Order of Simulacra controlled, the media localise and structure not real, autonomous groups, but samples, modelled socially and mentally by a barrage of messages. ‘Public opinion’ is evidently the finest of these samples – not an unreal but a hyperreal political substance, the fantastic hyperreality which survives only by editing and manipulation by the test. The irruption of the binary question/answer schema is of incalculable importance. Dislocating all discourse in a now bygone golden age, this schema short-circuits every dialectic of the signifier and the signified, a representative and a represented. There are no longer any objects whose signifieds are their functions, with opinion that ‘representative’ representa- tives would vote for, and the real interrogation to which the answer responds (and there are especially no longer any questions to which there are no answers). This entire process is dislocated: the contradictory pro- cesses of the true and the false, the real and the imaginary are abolished in this hyperreal logic of the montage. Michel Tort provides a fine analysis of this in his book on the Intelligence Quotient: The question as such does not determine its response in the form in which it was posed, it is the meaning given to it by the person to whom it was posed and also the idea the interrogated subject forms of the most appropriate tactic to adopt in order to respond according to the idea he forms of the interrogation’s expectations. [Le quotient intellectual, Paris: Maspéro, 1974] Tort again: The artifact is something other than a controlled transformation of the object for purposes of knowledge: it is a savage intervention in reality, at the end of which it is impossible to distinguish what in this reality arises out of objective knowledge and what results from the technical intervention (the medium). The IQ is such an artifact. No more true and false since we can no longer find any gap between ques- tion and answer. In the light of these tests, intelligence, like opinion and more generally every process of signification, is reduced to the ‘capacity to produce contrasting reactions to an increasing range of appropriate stimuli’. This whole analysis directly reflects McLuhan’s formula ‘The Medium is the Message’. It is in fact the medium, the very mode of editing, cutting, questioning, enticement, and demand by the medium that rules the pro- cess of signification. So we can understand why McLuhan saw an era of tactile communication in the era of electronic mass-media. In this we are closer in effect to the tactile than we are to ‘the visual universe, where there is greater distance, and reflection is always possible. At the moment that touching loses its sensory, sensual value for us (‘touching is an inter- action of the senses rather than a simple contact between a skin and an object’), it is possible that it might once more become the schema of a universe of communication – but this time as a field of tactile and tactical simulation where the message becomes a ‘message’, a tentacular entice- ment, a test. In every field we are tested, probed and sampled; the method is ‘tactical’ and the sphere of communication ‘tactile’. Not to mention the ideology of ‘contact’, which in all of its forms, seeks to replace the idea of Symbolic Exchange and Death86 social relations. A whole strategic configuration revolves around the test (the question/answer cell) as it does around a molecular command-code. The entire political sphere loses its specificity as soon as it enters the media’s polling game, that is to say, when it enters the integrated circuit of the question/answer. The electoral sphere is in any case the first large-scale institution where social exchange is reduced to getting a response. Thanks to these simplified signals, the electoral sphere is also the first institution to be universalised: universal suffrage is the first of the mass-media. Throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, political and economic practice merge increasingly into the same type of discourse; propaganda and public- ity were fused, marketing and merchandising both objects and powerful ideas. This linguistic convergence between the economic and the political is moreover what marks a society such as ours, where ‘political economy’ has been fully realised. By the same token, it is also its end, since the two spheres are abolished in another reality or media hyperreality. Here again, each term is elevated to a higher power, that of third-order simulacra. While many regret the media’s ‘corruption of politics’ and deplore the fact that the TV switch and the public opinion polls have cheerfully replaced opinion formation, this merely testifies that they have not understood polities at all. (Le Monde) This phase of political hyperrealism is characterised by the necessary con- junction of the two-party system and the emergence of opinion polls as the mirror of this alternating equivalence of the political game. Opinion polls are situated beyond all social production of opinion. They now refer only to a simulacrum of public opinion. This mirror of opinion is analogous in its way to that of the Gross National Product: the imaginary mirror of productive forces without regard for their social finality or counter-finality, the essential thing being merely that ‘it’ [ça] is reproduced. The same goes for public opinion, where what matters most is that it grows incessantly in its own image: this is the secret of mass representation. Nobody need produce an opinion any more, but everyone must reproduce public opin- ion, in the sense that all opinions are swallowed up in this kind of general equivalent and proceed from it thereafter (reproduce it, or what they take it to be, at the level of individual choice). For opinion as for material goods, production is dead: Long Live Reproduction! If McLuhan’s formula becomes significant anywhere, it is certainly here.4 Public opinion is par excellence both the medium and the message. The polls informing this opinion are the unceasing imposition of the medium as the message. They thereby belong to the same order as TV and the electronic media, which, as we have seen, are also a perpetual question/answer game, an instrument of perpetual polling. Polls manipulate the undecidable. Do they affect votes? True or false? Do they yield exact photographs of reality, or of mere tendencies, or a refraction of this reality in a hyperspace of simulation whose curvature we do not even know? True or false? Undecidable. However sophisticated their analyses, 87 The Order of Simulacra they always leave room for the reversibility of hypotheses. Statistics is just casuistry. This undecidability is proper to every simulation process (see above for the undecidability of the crisis). The internal logic of these pro- cesses (statistics, probabilities, operational cybernetics) is certainly rigorous and ‘scientific’, yet it somehow doesn’t get any purchase on anything, it is a fabulous fiction whose index of refraction in (true or false) reality is zero. This condition is all that gives these models any force, but the only truth it leaves them comes from paranoid projection tests of a caste or group, unde- cidability dreaming of a miraculous adequation between the real and their own models, and therefore an absolute manipulation. What is true in the scenario of statistics is also true of the regulated partition of the political sphere: the alternation of the forces in power, minority/majority substitutions and so on. At the limit of pure represen- tation, ‘it’ [ça] no longer represents anything. Politics dies from the over-regulated play of its distinct oppositions. The political sphere (more generally, the sphere of power) is emptied. In some ways this is the ran- som for the fulfilment of the desire of the political class for a perfect manipulation of social representation. Smoothly and surreptitiously, all social substance vanishes from this machine at the very moment of its perfected reproduction. The same goes for opinion polls: it is ultimately only members of the political classes who believe in them, just as it is only brokers and advertis- ing executives who really believe in publicity and market analyses. This is not due to a particular stupidity (although we can’t rule this out), but because the polls are homogeneous to the way contemporary politics oper- ate. They therefore take on a ‘real’ tactical value, operating as a regulating factor of the political classes in accordance with their own game-rules. The political classes, then, have good reason to believe in polls, as in fact they do. Ultimately, though, who else does? It is the burlesque spectacle of the hyperrepresentative (that is, not representative at all) political sphere that people savour and sample through opinion polls and the media. There is a jubilation proper to this spectacular nullity, and the final form that it takes is that of statistical contemplation. Such contemplation, moreover, is always coupled, as we know, with a profound disappointment – the species of disillusion that the polls provoke by absorbing all public speaking, by short-circuiting every means of expression. They exert fascination in pro- portion to this neutralisation through emptiness, to the vertigo they create by anticipating every possible reality in the image. The problem of opinion polls, then, is not their objective influence at all. As far as propaganda and advertising are concerned, such influence is, as we know, largely annulled by individual or collective resistance or inertia. Their problem is the operational simulation that they institute across the entire range of social practices, the leukaemia infecting all social substance, replac- ing blood with the white lymph of the media. The question/answer circularity runs through every domain. We are slowly beginning to notice that the whole domain of surveys, polls and Symbolic Exchange and Death88 statistics must be revised according to the radical suspicion brought to bear on their methods. The same suspicion bears, however, on ethnology. Unless you admit that the natives are totally ‘natural’ and incapable of simulation, then the problem is the same with the above as it is here: it is impossible to obtain a non-simulated response to a direct question, apart from merely reproducing the question. It is not even certain that we can test plants, animals or inert matter in the exact sciences with any hope of an ‘objective’ response. As to how those polled respond to the pollsters, how natives respond to ethnologists, the analysand to the analyst, you may be sure that there is total circularity in every case: those questioned always behave as the questioner imagines they will and solicits them to. Even the psychoana- lytic transference and counter-transference collapses today under the shock of this stimulated, simulated and anticipated response, which is simply a modality of the self-fulfilling prophecy.5 So we come up against the strange paradox where whatever those polled, analysands and natives say, it is irre- mediably short-circuited and lost. Indeed, it is on the basis of this foreclosure that these disciplines – sociology, psychoanalysis and ethnology – will be able to develop in leaps and bounds. Such amazing development is just hot air, however, since the circular response of those polled, the analysands and the natives is nevertheless a challenge and a victorious revenge: when they turn the question back on itself, isolating it by holding the expected mirror-image response up to it, then there is no hope that the question can ever get out of what is in fact the vicious circle of power. It is exactly the same in the electoral system, where ‘representatives’ no longer represent anything, by dint of controlling the electoral body’s responses so well: somewhere, everything has escaped them. That is why the controlled responses of the dominated are nevertheless somehow a genuine response, a desperate vengeance which lets power bury power. The systems of the ‘advanced democracies’ become stable through the formula of the two-party system. The de facto monopoly remains in the hands of a homogeneous political class, from the left to the right, but must not be exercised in this way. This is because single party rule, totalitarian- ism, is an unstable form which drains the political stage and can no longer ensure the feedback of public opinion, the minimal current in the inte- grated circuit that constitutes the transistorised political machine. The two-party system, by contrast, is the end of the end of representation since solicitation reaches its highest degree, in the name of a simple formal con- straint, when you approach the greatest perfect competitive equation between the two parties. This is only logical: democracy attains the law of equivalence in the political order, and this law is fulfilled by the see-sawing of the two terms, which thus maintains their equivalence but by means of this minuscule divergence allows for public consensus and the closure of the cycle of representation: a theatre of operations where only the smoky reflections of political Reason continue to function. Democracy’s credo of the individual’s ‘free choice’ effectively turns into its exact opposite: voting has become absolutely obligatory. If this is not the case de jure, then it is 89 The Order of Simulacra through the structural, statistical constraint of the two-party system, rein- forced by the opinion polls.6 Voting has become absolutely aleatory: when democracy reaches a formally advanced stage, it is distributed in equal quantities (50/50). Voting merges with the Brownian motion of particles or probability calculus, as if the whole world were voting according to chance, as if signs were voting. At this point, it matters little what the parties in power express historically and socially – it is even necessary that they no longer represent anything: the fascination of the game and the polls, the formal and statistical compulsion, is so much greater. ‘Classical’ universal suffrage already implies a certain neutralisation of the political field, in the name of a consensus over the rules of the game. But we can still distinguish the representatives and the represented in this game, on the basis of a real social antagonism in opinions. The neutralisation of this contradictory referential, under the sign of a public opinion which from now on is equal to itself, mediatised and homogenised by means of anticipation (polls), will make possible an alternation, not of parties, but of their ‘heads’, creating a simulated opposition between the two parties, absorbing their respective objectives, and a reversibility of every discourse into any other. Beyond the representative and the represented, this is the pure form of representation; just as, beyond the signifier and the signified, simulation marks the pure form of the political economy of the sign; just as, beyond use-value and exchange-value, beyond every substance of pro- duction, the flotation of currencies and their accountable drift marks the pure form of value. It may seem that the historical movement of capital carries it from open competition towards oligopoly and then towards monopoly, that democ- racy moves from a multi-party system to a two-party system and then towards single-party rule: oligopoly, or real duopoly, results from the tactical division of the monopoly. In every domain duopoly is the completed stage of monopoly. It is not that a political will (State intervention, anti-trust laws, etc.) shatters the market’s monopoly: any unitary system, if it wants to survive, must find a binary regulation. This does not change anything as regards monopoly, on the contrary, power is only absolute if it is able to diffract into various equivalents, if it knows how to divide in order to become stronger. This goes for detergent brands as much as for a ‘peaceful co-existence’. Two superpowers are necessary in order to keep the universe under control: a single empire would crumble by itself. The balance of ter- ror merely allows regulated oppositions to be put in place, for strategy is structural, never atomic. Even if this regulated opposition can be ramified into a more complex scenario, the matrix remains binary. From now on, it will never again be a question of a duel or open competitive struggle, but one of couplets of simultaneous oppositions. From the smallest disjunctive unit (the question/answer particle) up to the macroscopic level of the great ‘two-party’ systems that govern the econ- omy, politics and global co-existence, the matrix never changes. It is always Symbolic Exchange and Death90 the 0/1, the binary scansion that is affirmed as the metastable or homeo- static form of contemporary systems. It is the core of the processes of simulation that dominate us. It can be organised into a game of unstable variations, from polyvalence to tautology, without putting the strategic form of the duopoly into question. It is the divine form of simulation.7 Why has the World Trade Center in New York got two towers? All Manhattan’s great buildings are always content to confront each other in a competitive verticality, from which there results an architectural pan- orama that is the image of the capitalist system: a pyramidal jungle, every building on the offensive against every other. The system itself can be spotted in the famous image we have of New York on arriving by sea. This image has changed completely in a few years. The effigy of the capitalist system has passed from the pyramid to the punch card. The buildings are no longer obelisks, but trustingly stand next to one another like the col- umns of a statistical graph. This new architecture no longer embodies a competitive system, but a countable one where competition has disap- peared in favour of correlation. (New York is the only city in the world to have retraced, throughout the entire length and breadth of its history, the contemporary form of the capitalist system in this way, instantaneously changing according to this system. No European city has ever done this.) This architectural graphism belongs to the monopoly: the World Trade Center’s two towers are perfect parallelepipeds, four hundred metres high on a square base; they are perfectly balanced and blind communicating vessels. The fact that there are two identical towers signifies the end of all competition, the end of every original reference. Paradoxically, if there were only one, the WTC would not embody the monopoly, since we have seen that it becomes stable in a dual form. For the sign to remain pure it must become its own double: this doubling of the sign really put an end to what it designated. Every Andy Warhol does this: the multiple replicas of Marilyn Monroe’s face are of course at the same time the death of the original and the end of representation. The two towers of the WTC are the visible sign of the closure of a system in the vertigo of doubling, while the other skyscrapers are each the original moment of a system continu- ally surpassing itself in the crisis and the challenge. This doubling, this replication, inspires a particular fascination. However high they are and however much higher than all the others, the two towers nevertheless signify an arrested verticality. They ignore the other buildings, they are not of the same race, they no longer challenge them nor compare themselves to them; the two towers reflect one another and reach their highest point in the prestige of similitude. They echo the idea of the model they are for one another, and their semi-detached altitude no longer has a transcendent value, but only signifies that the commutative strategy of the model will now historically prevail over the heart of the system itself (as New York truly is), over the traditional strategy of competition. The build- ings of the Rockefeller Center also mirror their glass and steel façades in one another, in the city’s infinite specularity. The towers are themselves blind 91 The Order of Simulacra and no longer have a façade. Every reference to habitat, to the façade as ‘face’, to the interior and exterior, that we still find even in the Chase Manhattan Bank or in the most daring mirror buildings from the sixties has been erased. At the same moment that the rhetoric of verticality is disap- pearing, so too is the rhetoric of the mirror. There now remains only a series based on the binary code, as if architecture, in the image of the system, proceeded only by means of an unchanging genetic code, a definitive model. The Hyperrealism of Simulations We have just defined a digital space, a magnetic field of the code with its modelled polarisations, diffractions and gravitations, with the insistent and perpetual flux of the smallest disjunctive units (the question/answer cell operates like the cybernetic atom of signification). We must now measure the disparity between this field of control and the traditional field of repression, the police-space which used to correspond to a violence of signification. This space was one of reactionary conditioning, inspired by the Pavlovian apparatus of programmed and repetitive aggression which we also saw scaled up in ‘hard sell’ advertising and the political propaganda of the thirties. A crafted but industrial violence that aimed to produce terrified behaviour and animal obedience. This no longer has any meaning. Totalitarian, bureaucratic concentration is a schema dating from the era of the market law of value. The schema of equivalences effectively imposes the form of a general equivalent, and hence the centralisation of a global process. This is an archaic rationality compared to simulation, in which it is no longer a single general equivalent but a diffraction of models that plays the regulative role: no longer the form of the general equivalent, but the form of distinct oppositions. We pass from injunction to disjunction through the code, from the ultimatum to solicitation, from obligatory pas- sivity to models constructed from the outset on the basis of the subject’s ‘active response’, and this subject’s involvement and ‘ludic’ participation, towards a total environment model made up of incessant spontaneous responses, joyous feedback and irradiated contacts. According to Nicolas Schöffer, this is a ‘concretisation of the general ambience’: the great festival of Participation is made up of myriad stimuli, miniaturised tests, and infinitely divisible question/answers, all magnetised by several great models in the luminous field of the code. Here comes the great Culture of tactile communication, under the sign of techno-lumino-kinetic space and total spatio-dynamic theatre! A whole imaginary based on contact, a sensory mimicry and a tactile mysticism, basically ecology in its entirety, comes to be grafted on to this universe of operational simulation, multi-stimulation and multi-response. This incessant test of successful adaptation is naturalised by assimilating it to animal mimicry (‘the phenomenon of animals’ adaptation to the colours and forms of their habitat also holds for man’ – Nicolas Schöffer), and even Symbolic Exchange and Death92 to the Indians with their ‘innate sense of ecology’! Tropisms, mimicry and empathy: the ecological evangelism of open systems, with positive or nega- tive feedback, will be engulfed in this breach, with an ideology of regulation through information that is only the avatar, in accordance with a more flexible rationality, of the Pavlov reflex. Hence electro-shock is replaced by body attitude as the condition of mental health. When notions of need, perception, desire, etc., become operational, then the apparatuses of force and forcing yield to ambient apparatuses. A generalised, mystical ecology of the ‘niche’ and the context, a simulated environment eventually including the ‘Centres for Cultural and Aesthetic Re-animation’ planned for the Left Bank (why not?) and the Centre for Sexual Leisure, which, built in the form of a breast, will offer ‘a superlative euphoria thanks to a pulsating ambience. … Workers from all classes will be able to enter these stimulating centres.’ A spatio-dynamic fascination, just like ‘total theatre’, set up ‘according to a hyperbolic, circular apparatus turning around a cylindrical spindle’. No more scenes, no more cuts, no more ‘gaze’, the end of the spectacle and the spectacular, towards the total, fusional, tactile and aes- thesic (and no longer the aesthetic) etc., environment. We can only think of Artaud’s total theatre, his Theatre of Cruelty, of which this spatio-dynamic simulation is the abject, black-humour caricature. Here cruelty is replaced by minimum and maximum ‘stimulus thresholds’, by the invention of ‘per- ceptual codes calculated on the basis of saturation thresholds’. Even the good old ‘catharsis’ of the classical theatre of the passions has today become a homeopathy by means of simulation. The end of the spectacle brings with it the collapse of reality into hyper- realism, the meticulous reduplication of the real, preferably through another reproductive medium such as advertising or photography. Through reproduction from one medium into another the real becomes volatile, it becomes the allegory of death, but it also draws strength from its own destruction, becoming the real for its own sake, a fetishism of the lost object which is no longer the object of representation, but the ecstasy of denega- tion and its own ritual extermination: the hyperreal. Realism had already inaugurated this tendency. The rhetoric of the real already signals that its status has been radically altered (the golden age of the innocence of language where what is said need not be doubled in an effect of reality). Surrealism was still in solidarity with the realism it con- tested, but which it doubled and ruptured in the imaginary. The hyperreal represents a much more advanced phase insofar as it effaces the contradic- tion of the real and the imaginary. Irreality no longer belongs to the dream or the phantasm, to a beyond or a hidden interiority, but to the hallucina- tory resemblance of the real to itself. To gain exit from the crisis of representation, the real must be sealed off in a pure repetition. Before emerging in pop art and painterly neo-realism, this tendency can already be discerned in the nouveau roman. Here the project is to construct a void around the real, to eradicate all psychology and subjectivity from it in order to give it a pure objectivity. In fact, this is only the objectivity of the 93 The Order of Simulacra pure gaze, an objectivity finally free of the object, but which merely remains a blind relay of the gaze that scans it. It is easy to detect the unconscious trying to remain hidden in this circular seduction. This is indeed the impression made by the nouveau roman, a wild elision of meaning in a meticulous but blind reality. Syntax and semantics have disappeared: the object now only appears in court, where its scattered frag- ments are subjected to unremitting cross-examination. There is neither metaphor nor metonymy, only a successive immanence under the law enforcing authority of the gaze. This ‘objective’ microscopy incites reality to vertiginous motion, the vertiginous death of representation within the confines of representation. The old illusions of relief, perspective and depth (both spatial and psychological) bound up with the perception of the object are over with: optics in its entirety, scopics, has begun to operate on the surface of things – the gaze has become the object’s molecular code. There are several possible modalities of this vertigo of realistic simulation: 1. The detailed deconstruction of the real, the paradigmatic close ‘reading’ of the object: the flattening out, linearity and seriality of part-objects. 2. Abyssal vision: all the games of splitting the object in two and duplicat- ing it in every detail. This reduction is taken to be a depth, indeed a critical metalanguage, and doubtless this was true of a reflective config- uration of the sign in a dialectics of the mirror. From now on this infinite refraction is nothing more than another type of seriality in which the real is no longer reflected, but folds in on itself to the point of exhaustion. 3. The properly serial form (Andy Warhol): Here the paradigmatic dimension is abolished along with the syntagmatic dimension, since there is no longer a flexion of forms, nor even an internal reflexion, only a contiguity of the same: zero degree flexion and reflexion. Take this erotic photograph of twin sisters where the fleshy reality of their bodies is annihilated by their similarity. How do you invest when the beauty of the one is immediately duplicated in the other? The gaze can only go from one to the other, and these poles enclose all vision. This is a subtle means of murdering the original, but it is also a singular seduc- tion, where the total extent of the object is intercepted by its infinite diffraction into itself (this scenario reverses the Platonic myth of the reunion of two halves separated by a symbol. In the series, signs subdi- vide like protozoa). Perhaps this is the seduction of death, in the sense that, for we sexually differentiated beings, death is perhaps not noth- ingness, but quite simply the mode of reproduction prior to sexual differentiation. The models that generate in infinite chains effectively bring us closer to the generation of protozoa; sex, which for us is con- fused with life, being the only remaining difference. 4. This pure machinality is doubtless only a paradoxical limit, however. Binarity and digitality constitute the true generative formula which encompasses all the others and is, in a way, the stabilised form of the code. Symbolic Exchange and Death94 This does not mean pure repetition, but minimal difference, the mini- mal inflexion between two terms, that is, the ‘smallest common para- digm’ that can sustain the fiction of meaning. A combinatory of differentiation internal to the painterly object as well as to the con- sumer object, this simulation contracts, in contemporary art, to the point of being nothing more than the infinitesimal difference that still separates hyperreality from hyperpainting. Hyperpainting claims to exhaust itself to the point of its sacrificial eclipse in the face of the real, but we know how all painting’s prestige is revived in this infinitesimal difference: painting retreats into the border that separates the painted surface and the wall. It also hides in the signature, the metaphysical sign of painting and the metaphysics of representation at the limit, where it takes itself as its own model (the ‘pure gaze’) and turns around itself in the compulsive repetition of the code. The very definition of the real is that of which it is possible to provide an equivalent reproduction. It is a contemporary of science, which postulates that a process can be reproduced exactly within given conditions, with an industrial rationality which postulates a universal system of equivalences (classical representation is not equivalence but transcription, interpretation and commentary). At the end of this process of reproducibility, the real is not only that which can be reproduced, but that which is always already reproduced: the hyperreal. So are we then at the end of the real and the end of art due to a total mutual reabsorption? No, since at the level of simulacra, hyperrealism is the apex of both art and the real, by means of a mutual exchange of the privileges and prejudices that found them. The hyperreal is beyond rep- resentation (cf. Jean-François Lyotard, ‘Esquisse d’une économique de l’hyperrealisme’, L’Art vivant, 36, 1973) 8 only because it is entirely within simulation, in which the barriers of representation rotate crazily, an implosive madness which, far from being ex-centric, keeps its gaze fixed on the centre, on its own abyssal repetition. Analogous to the effect of an internal distance from the dream, allowing us to say that we are dreaming, hyperrealism is only the play of censorship and the perpetuation of the dream, becoming an integral part of a coded reality that it perpetuates and leaves unaltered. In fact, hyperrealism must be interpreted in inverse manner: today reality itself is hyperrealist. The secret of surrealism was that the most everyday reality could become surreal, but only at privileged instants which again arose out of art and the imaginary. Today everyday, political, social, historical, economic, etc., reality has already incorporated the hyperrealist dimension of simulation so that we are now living entirely within the ‘aesthetic’ hallucination of reality. The old slogan ‘reality is stranger than fiction’, which still corresponded to the surrealist stage in the aestheticisation of life, has been outrun, since there is no longer any fiction that life can possibly confront, even as its conqueror. Reality has 95 The Order of Simulacra passed completely into the game of reality. Radical disaffection, the cool and cybernetic stage, replaces the hot, phantasmatic phase. The consummate enjoyment [jouissance] of the signs of guilt, despair, violence and death are replacing guilt, anxiety and even death in the total euphoria of simulation. This euphoria aims to abolish cause and effect, origin and end, and replace them with reduplication. Every closed system protects itself in this way from the referential and the anxiety of the refer- ential, as well as from all metalanguage that the system wards off by operating its own metalanguage, that is, by duplicating itself as its own critique. In simulation, the metalinguistic illusion reduplicates and com- pletes the referential illusion (the pathetic hallucination of the sign and the pathetic hallucination of the real). ‘It’s a circus’, ‘it’s a theatre’, ‘it’s a movie’; all these old adages are ancient naturalist denunciations. This is no longer what is at issue. What is at issue this time is turning the real into a satellite, putting an undefinable reality with no common measure into orbit with the phantasma that once illus- trated it. This satellisation has subsequently been materialised as the two-room-kitchen-shower which we really have sent into orbit, to the ‘spatial power’ you could say, with the latest lunar module. The most every- day aspect of the terrestrial environment raised to the rank of a cosmic value, an absolute decor, hypostatised in space. This is the end of metaphys- ics and the beginning of the era of hyperreality.9 The spatial transcendence of the banality of the two-room apartment by a cool, machinic figuration in hyperrealism10 tells us only one thing, however: this module, such as it is, participates in a hyperspace of representation where everyone is already in possession of the technical means for the instant reproduction of his or her own life. Thus the Tupolev’s pilots who crashed in Bourget were able, by means of their cameras, to see themselves dying at first hand. This is noth- ing other than the short-circuit of the response by the question in the test, a process of instant renewal whereby reality is immediately contaminated by its simulacrum. A specific class of allegorical and somewhat diabolical objects used to exist, made up of mirrors, images, works of art (concepts?). Although sim- ulacra, they were transparent and manifest (you could distinguish craftsmanship [façon] from the counterfeit [contrefaçon]) with their own characteristic style and savoir-faire. Pleasure, then, consisted in locating what was ‘natural’ within what was artificial and counterfeit. Today, where the real and the imaginary are intermixed in one and the same operational totality, aesthetic fascination reigns supreme: with subliminal perception (a sort of sixth sense) of special effects, editing and script, reality is overex- posed to the glare of models. This is no longer a space of production, but a reading strip, a coding and decoding strip, magnetised by signs. Aesthetic reality is no longer achieved through art’s premeditation and distancing, but by its elevation to the second degree, to the power of two, by the anticipa- tion and immanence of the code. A kind of unintentional parody hovers over everything, a tactical simulation, a consummate aesthetic enjoyment Symbolic Exchange and Death96 [jouissance], is attached to the indefinable play of reading and the rules of the game. Travelling signs, media, fashion and models, the blind but brilliant ambience of simulacra. Art has for a long time prefigured this turn, by veering towards what today is a turn to everyday life. Very early on the work of art produced a double of itself as the manipulation of the signs of art, bringing about an oversignification of art, or, as Lévi-Strauss said, an ‘academicisation of the signifier’, irreversibly introducing art to the form of the sign. At this point art entered into infinite reproduction, with everything that doubles itself, even the banal reality of the everyday, falling by the same token under the sign of art and becoming aesthetic. The same goes for production, which we might say has today entered into aesthetic reduplication, the phase where, expelling all content and all finality, it becomes somehow abstract and non-figurative. In this way it expresses the pure form of production, taking upon itself, as art does, the value of the finality without end. Art and indus- try may then exchange their signs: art can become a reproductive machine (Andy Warhol) without ceasing to be art, since the machine is now nothing but a sign. Production can also lose all its social finality as its means of ver- ification, and finally glorify in the prestigious, hyperbolic and aesthetic signs that the great industrial complexes are, 400-m-high towers or the numeri- cal mysteries of the Gross National Product. So art is everywhere, since artifice lies at the heart of reality. So art is dead, since not only is its critical transcendence dead, but reality itself, entirely impregnated by an aesthetic that holds onto its very structurality, has become inseparable from its own image. It no longer even has the time to take on the effect of reality. Reality is no longer stranger than fiction: it captures every dream before it can take on the dream effect. A schizophrenic vertigo of serial signs that have no counterfeit, no possible sublimation, and are immanent to their own repetition – who will say where the reality they simulate now lies? They no longer even repress anything (which, if you like, keeps simulation from entering the sphere of psychosis): even the primary processes have been annihilated. The cool universe of digitality absorbs the universe of metaphor and metonymy. The simulation principle dominates the reality principle as well as the pleasure principle. Kool Killer, or The Insurrection of Signs In the spring of 1972 in New York a spate of graffiti broke out which, start- ing with ghetto walls and fences, finally overcame subways and buses, lor- ries and elevators, corridors and monuments, completely covering them in graphics ranging from the rudimentary to the sophisticated, whose content was neither political nor pornographic. These graphics consisted solely of names, surnames drawn from underground comics such as DUKE SPIRIT SUPERKOOL KOOLKILLER ACE VIPERE SPIDER EDDIE KOLA and 97 The Order of Simulacra so on, followed by their street number – EDDIE 135 WOODIE 110 SHADOW 137, etc. – or even by a number in Roman numerals, a dynastic or filiatory index – SNAKE I SNAKE II SNAKE III, etc. – up to L (50), depending on which name, which totemic designation is taken up by these new graffitists. This was all done with Magic Markers or spray-paint, allowing the inscrip- tions to be a metre or more in height by the entire length of the subway car. At night, youths would work their way into bus depots or subways, even getting inside the cars, breaking out into an orgy of graphics. The following day all these subway trains cross Manhattan in both directions. The graphics are erased (but this is difficult), the graffitists are arrested and imprisoned, the sale of marker pens and spray cans is forbidden, but to no avail, since the youths manufacture them by hand and start again every night. Today this movement has stopped, or at least is no longer so extraor- dinarily violent. It could only have been ephemeral, and, besides, in a single year of history it developed greatly. The graffitists became more expert, with incredible baroque graphics, and ramified into styles and schools connected to the different groups in operation. Young Blacks and Puerto Ricans originated the movement, and the graffitists were particu- lar to New York. Several wall paintings are found in other cities with large ethnic minorities, improvised collective works with an ethno-political content, but very little graffiti. One thing is certain: both the graffitists and the muralists sprang up after the repressions of the great urban riots of 1966–70. Like the riots, graffiti was a savage offensive, but of another kind, changing content and terrain. A new type of intervention in the city, no longer as a site of economic and political power, but as a space-time of the terrorist power of the media, signs and the dominant culture. The urban city is also a neutralised, homogenised space, a space where indifference, the segregation of urban ghettos, and the downgrading of districts, races and certain age groups are on the increase. In short, it is the cut-up space of distinctive signs. Multiple codes assign a determinate space-time to every act and instant of everyday life. The racial ghettos on the outskirts or in the city centre are only the limit expression of this urban configuration: an immense centre for marshalling and enclosure where the system reproduces itself not only economically and spatially, but also in depth by the ramifications of signs and codes, by the symbolic destruction of social relations. There is a horizontal and vertical expansion of the city in the image of the economic system itself. Political economy, however, has a third dimen- sion where all sociality is invested, covered and dismantled by signs. Neither architecture nor urbanism can do anything about this, since they them- selves result from this new turn taken by the general economy of the system: they are its operational semiology. The city was first and foremost a site for the production and realisa- tion of commodities, a site of industrial concentration and exploitation. Symbolic Exchange and Death98 Today the city is first and foremost the site of the sign’s execution, as in its life or death sentence. In the city’s ‘red belt’ of factories, and in the working-class outskirts, this is no longer the case for us. In this city, in the same space, the historical dimension of the class struggle, the negativity of labour power, were still inscribed, an irreducible social specificity. The factory, as the model of socialisation through capital, has not disappeared today but, in line with the general strategy, has been replaced by the entire city as the space of the code. The urban matrix no longer realises a power (labour power) but a difference (the operation of the sign): metallurgy has become semiurgy. We see this urban scenario materialised in the new cities which directly result from the operational analysis of needs and sign-functions, and in which everything is conceived, projected and realised on the basis of an analytic definition: environment, transport, labour, leisure, play and culture become so many commutable terms on the chessboard of the city, a homo- geneous space defined as a total environment. Hence the connection between the urban landscape and racism: there is no difference between the act of packing people into one homogeneous space (which we call a ghetto) on the basis of a racial definition, and the act of making people homogeneous in a new city on the basis of a functional definition of their needs. It follows one and the same logic. The city is no longer the politico-industrial zone that it was in the nineteenth century, it is the zone of signs, the media and the code. By the same token, its truth no longer lies in its geographical situation, as it did for the factory or even the traditional ghetto. Its truth, enclosure in the sign- form, lies all around us. It is the ghetto of television and advertising, the ghetto of consumers and the consumed, of readers read in advance, encoded decoders of every message, those circulating in, and circulated by, the sub- way, leisure-time entertainers and the entertained, etc. Every space-time of urban life is a ghetto, each of which is connected to every other. Today a multiplicity of codes submit socialisation, or rather desocialisation, to this structural breakdown. The era of production, commodities and labour power merely amounts to the interdependence of all social processes, including exploitation, and it was on this socialisation, realised in part by capital itself, that Marx based his revolutionary perspective. But this histor- ical solidarity (whether factory, local or class solidarity) has disappeared. From now on they are separate and indifferent under the sign of television and the automobile, under the sign of behaviour models inscribed every- where in the media or in the layout of the city. Everyone falls into line in their delirious identification with leading models, orchestrated models of simulation. Everyone is commutable, like the models themselves. This is the era of geometrically variable individuals. As for the geometry of the code, it remains fixed and centralised. The monopoly of this code, circulating throughout the urban fabric, is the genuine form of social relations. It is possible to conceive of the decentralisation of the sphere of material production, even that the historical relation between the city and commodity 99 The Order of Simulacra production is coming to an end. The system can do without the industrial, productive city, the space-time of the commodity and market-based social relations. The signs of this development are evident. It cannot, however, do without the urban as the space-time of the code and reproduction, for the centrality of the code is the definition of power itself. Whatever attacks contemporary semiocracy, this new form of value, is therefore politically essential: graffiti for example. According to this new form there is a total commutability of elements within a functional set, each taking on meaning only insofar as it is a term that is capable of structural variation in accordance with the code. Under these conditions, radical revolt effectively consists in saying ‘I exist, I am so and so, I live on such and such street, I am alive here and now.’ This would still be an identitarian revolt however, combating anonymity by demanding a proper name and a reality. The graffitists went further in that they opposed pseudonyms rather than names to anonymity. They are seek- ing not to escape the combinatory in order to regain an identity (which is impossible in any case), but to turn indeterminacy against the system, to turn indeterminacy into extermination. Retaliation, reversion of the code according to its own logic, on its own terrain, gaining victory over it because it exceeds semiocracy’s own non-referentiality. SUPERBEE SPIX COLA 139 KOOL GUY CRAZY CROSS 136 means nothing, it is not even a proper name, but a symbolic matriculation number whose function it is to derail the common system of designations. Such terms are not at all original, they all come from comic strips where they were imprisoned in fiction. They blasted their way out however, so as to burst into reality like a scream, an interjection, an anti-discourse, as the waste of all syntactic, poetic and political development, as the smallest radical element that cannot be caught by any organised discourse. Invincible due to their own poverty, they resist every interpretation and every connotation, no longer denoting anyone or anything. In this way, with neither connotation nor deno- tation, they escape the principle of signification and, as empty signifiers, erupt into the sphere of the full signs of the city, dissolving it on contact. Names without intimacy, just as the ghettos have no intimacy, no private life, but thrive on an intense collective exchange. These names make no claim to an identity or a personality, but claim the radical exclusivity of the clan, gang, age group, group or ethnicity which, as we know, passes through the devolution of the name, coupled with an absolute loyalty, to this totemic designation, even if it came directly from the pages of underground comics. This form of symbolic designation is annihilated by our social struc- ture which imposes a proper name and a private individuality on everyone, shattering all solidarity in the name of an urban, abstract and universal sociality. These names or tribal appellations have, by contrast, a real sym- bolic charge: they are made to be given, exchanged, transmitted and relayed in a collective anonymity, where these names are exchanged as terms to introduce group members amongst each other, although they are no more private a property than language. Symbolic Exchange and Death100 This is the real force of a symbolic ritual, and, in this sense, graffiti runs contrary to all media and advertising signs, although they might create the illusion, on our city walls, that they are the same incantation. Advertising has been spoken of as a ‘festival’, since, without it, the urban environment would be dismal. But in fact it is only a cold bustle, a simulacrum of appeal and warmth, it makes no contacts, it cannot be revived by an autonomous or collective reading, and it does not create a symbolic network. More so than the walls that support it, advertising is itself a wall of functional signs made to be decoded, and its effects are exhausted in this decoding. All media signs issue from this space without qualities, from this surface of inscription set up between producers and consumers, transmitters and receivers of signs. The city is a ‘body without organs’, as Deleuze says,11 an intersection of channelled flows. The graffitists themselves come from the territorial order. They territorialise decoded urban spaces – a particular street, wall or district comes to life through them, becoming a collective territory again. They do not confine themselves to the ghetto, they export the ghetto through all the arteries of the city, they invade the white city and reveal that it is the real ghetto of the Western world. A linguistic ghetto erupts into the city with graffiti, a kind of riot of signs. In the becoming-sign of the sign, graffiti has until now always constituted the basest form (the sexual and pornographic base), the shameful, repressed inscriptions in pissoirs and waste grounds. Only political and propagandistic slogans have conquered the walls in a direct offensive, full signs for which the wall is still a support and language a traditional medium. They are not aiming at the wall itself, nor at the pure functionality of signs as such. Doubtless it was only in May ’68 in France that the graffiti and posters swept through the city in a different manner, attacking the support itself, producing a savage mobility on the walls, an inscription so sudden that it amounted to annihilating them. The inscriptions and frescoes at Nanterre actually hijacked the wall as a signifier of terrorist, functional gridded space: an anti-media action. The proof is that the government has been careful enough neither to efface nor to repaint the walls: the mass political slogans and posters have taken responsibility for this. There is no need for repres- sion since the media themselves, the far-left media, have given the walls back their blind function. Since then, we have met with the Stockholm ‘protest wall’ where one is at liberty to protest on a certain surface, but where it is forbidden to put graffiti on neighbouring surfaces. There has also been the ephemeral onslaught of the advertising hijack, limited by its own support, but already utilising the avenues the media have themselves opened up: subways, stations and posters. Consider also the assault on television by Jerry Rubin and America’s counter-culture. This is a political attempt to hijack a great mass-medium, but only at the level of content and without changing the media themselves. New York graffiti utilised urban clearways and mobile supports for the first time in a free and wide-ranging offensive. Above all, however, the very form of the media themselves, that is, their mode of production and 101 The Order of Simulacra distribution, was attacked for the first time. This was precisely because graffiti has no content and no message: this emptiness gives it its strength. So it was no accident that the total offensive was accompanied by a reces- sion in terms of content. This comes from a sort of revolutionary intuition, namely that deep ideology no longer functions at the level of political signifieds, but at the level of the signifier, and that this is where the system is vulnerable and must be dismantled. Thus the political significance of graffiti becomes clear. It grew out of the repression of the urban riots in the ghettos. Struck by this repression, the revolt underwent a split into a doctrinal pur et dur Marxist-Leninist politi- cal organisation on the one hand, and, on the other, a savage cultural process with neither goal, ideology, nor content, at the level of signs. The first group called for a genuinely revolutionary practice and accused the graffitists of folklore, but it’s the other way round: the defeat of 1970 brought about a regression into traditional political activism, but it also necessitated the radicalisation of revolt on the real strategic terrain of the total manipulation of codes and significations. This is not at all a flight into signs, but on the contrary an extraordinary development in theory and practice (these two terms now no longer being kept distinct by the party). Insurrection and eruption in the urban landscape as the site of the repro- duction of the code. At this level, relations of forces no longer count, since signs don’t operate on the basis of force, but on the basis of difference. We must therefore attack by means of difference, dismantling the network of codes, attacking coded differences by means of an uncodeable absolute dif- ference, over which the system will stumble and disintegrate. There is no need for organised masses, nor for a political consciousness to do this – a thousand youths armed with marker pens and cans of spray-paint are enough to scramble the signals of urbania and dismantle the order of signs. Graffiti covers every subway map in New York, just as the Czechs changed the names of the streets in Prague to disconcert the Russians: guerrilla action. Despite appearances, the City Walls Project, the painted walls, have nothing to do with graffiti. Moreover, they are prior to graffiti and will survive it. The initiative for these painted walls comes from the top as an innovatory attempt to enliven urbania set up with municipal subsidies. The ‘City Walls Incorporated’ organisation was founded in 1969 ‘to promote the program and technical aspects of wall-painting’. Its budget was covered by the New York Department of Cultural Affairs along with various other foundations such as that of David Rockefeller. His artistic ideology: ‘The natural alliance between buildings and monumental painting.’ His goal: ‘To make a gift of art to the people of New York.’ Consider also the ‘Billboard Art Project’ in Los Angeles: This project was set up to promote artistic representations that use the billboard as a medium in the urban environment. Thanks to the collaboration of Foster and Kleiser [two large advertising agencies], public billposting spaces have thus become an art showcase for the painters of Los Angeles. They create a dynamic medium and take art out of the restricted circle of the galleries and museums. Symbolic Exchange and Death102 Of course, these operations are confined to professionals, artists brought together in a consortium from New York. No possible ambiguity here: this is a question of a politics of the environment, of large-scale urban plan- ning, where both the city and art gain. They gain because the city does not explode with the eruption of art ‘out in the open’, in the streets, nor does art explode on contact with the city. The entire city becomes an art gallery, art finds a whole new parading ground in the city. Neither undergoes any structural alteration, they merely exchange their privileges. ‘To make a gift of art to the people of New York’! We need only compare this to SUPERKOOL’s formula: ‘There are those who don’t like it, man, but whether they like it or not, we’ve become the strongest art movement to hit the city of New York.’ This makes all the difference. Some of the painted walls may be beauti- ful, but that has nothing to do with it. They will find a place in the history of art for having been able to create space on the blind, bare walls, by means of line and colour alone: the trompe-l’oeils are always the most beautiful, those painted walls that create an illusion of space and depth, those that ‘enhance architecture with imagination’, according to one of the artists’ formulas. But this is precisely where their limits lie. They play at architec- ture without breaking the rules of the game, they recycle architecture in the imaginary, but retain the sacrament of architecture (from the technical support to the monumental structure, including even its social, class aspect, since most of the City Walls of this kind are in the white, civilised areas of the cities). So architecture and town planning, even if they are transfigured by the imagination, cannot change anything, since they are mass-media themselves and, even in their most daring conception, they reproduce mass social rela- tions, which is to say that collectively they allow people no response. All they can do is enliven, and participate in urban recycling, design in the largest sense: the simulation of exchange and collective values, the simula- tion of play and non-functional spaces. Hence the adventure parks for the children, the green spaces, the houses of culture; hence the City Walls and the protest walls, the green spaces of language [parole]. The graffitists themselves care little for architecture; they defile it, forget about it and cross the street. The mural artist respects the wall as he used to respect the limitations of his easel. Graffiti runs from one house to the next, from one wall of a building to the next, from the wall onto the win- dow or the door, or windows on subway trains, or the pavements. Graffiti overlaps, is thrown up, superimposes (superimposition amounting to the abolition of the support as a framework, just as it is abolished as frame when its limits are not respected). Its graphics resemble the child’s poly- morphous perversity, ignoring the boundaries between the sexes and the delimitation of erogenous zones. Curiously, moreover, graffiti turns the city’s walls and corners, the subway’s cars and the buses, into a body, a body without beginning or end, made erotogenic in its entirety by writing just as the body may be in the primitive inscription (tattooing). Tattooing takes 103 The Order of Simulacra place on the body. In primitive societies, along with other ritual signs, it makes the body what it is – material for symbolic exchange: without tattoo- ing, as without masks, the body is only what it is, naked and expressionless. By tattooing walls, SUPERSEX and SUPERKOOL free them from architec- ture and turn them once again into living, social matter, into the moving body of the city before it has been branded with functions and institutions. The end of the ‘four walls’ when they are tattooed like archaic effigies. End of the repressive space-time of urban transport systems where the subway cars fly past like missiles or living hydras tattooed up to the eyes. Something about the city has become tribal, parietal, before writing, with these powerful emblems stripped of meaning. An incision into the flesh of empty signs that do not signify personal identity, but group initiation and affiliation: ‘A biocy- bernetic self-fulfilling prophecy world orgy I.’12 It is nevertheless astonishing to see this unfold in a Quaternary cyber- netic city dominated by the two glass and aluminium towers of the World Trade Center, invulnerable metasigns of the system’s omnipotence. There are also frescoes and murals in the ghettos, the spontaneous art- works of ethnic groups who paint their own walls. Socially and politically, the impulse is the same as with graffiti. These are savagely painted walls, not financed by the urban administration. Moreover, they all focus on polit- ical themes, on a revolutionary message: the unity of the oppressed, world peace, the cultural promotion of ethnic communities, solidarity, and only rarely the violence of open struggle. In short, as opposed to graffiti, they have a meaning, a message. And, contrary to the City Walls project, which drew its inspiration from abstract, geometrical or surrealist art, they are always inspired by figurative and idealist forms. We can also see the differ- ence between a scholarly and cultivated avant-garde art and the popular, realist forms with a strong ideological content but formally ‘less advanced’ (even though they have a variety of inspirations, from children’s drawings to Mexican frescoes, from a scholarly art to Douannier Rousseau, or from Fernand Léger up to the simple images of Epinal, the sentimental illustra- tions of popular struggles). In any case, it is a matter of a counter-culture that, far from being underground, is reflexive and connected to the political and cultural consciousness of the oppressed group. Here again, some of these walls are beautiful, others less so. That this aesthetic criterion can operate is in a certain way a sign of weakness. What I mean is that even though they are savages and anonymous collectives, they respect their support as well as the language of painting, even if this is in order to articulate a political act. In this sense, they can very easily be looked on as decorative works of art (some of them are even conceived as such), and have an eye turned towards their own value. Most of them are protected from this museum-culturalisation by the rapid destruction of the fences and the crumbling walls – here the municipal authorities do not patronise through art, and the negritude of the support is in the image of the ghetto. However, their mortality is not the same as the mortality of graffiti, which is systematically condemned to police repression (it is even Symbolic Exchange and Death104 forbidden to take photographs of it). This is because graffiti is more offensive and more radical, bursting into the white city; above all it is trans-ideological, trans-artistic. This is almost a paradox: whereas the Black and Puerto Rican walls, even if they have not been signed, always carry a virtual signature (a political or cultural, if not an artistic, reference), graffiti, composed of nothing but names, effectively avoids every reference and every origin. It alone is savage, in that its message is zero. We will come to what it signifies elsewhere, by analysing the two types of recuperation of which it is the object (apart from police repression): 1. It is recuperated as art. Jay Jacobs: ‘A primitive, millenial, communitar- ian form, not an elitist one like Abstract Expressionism.’ Or again: ‘The subway cars rumble past one after the other throughout the station, like so many Jackson Pollocks hurtling by, roaring through the corridors of the history of art.’ We speak of ‘graffiti artists’ and ‘an eruption of popular art’ created by youth, which ‘will remain one of the important and characteristic manifestations of the art of the ’70s’, and so on. Always the aesthetic reduction, the very form of our dominant culture. 2. It is interpreted (and I am talking about the most admiring interpreta- tions here) in terms of a reclamation of identity and personal freedom, as non-conformism: ‘The indestructible survival of the individual in an inhuman environment’ (Mitzi Cunliffe in The New York Times). A bourgeois humanist interpretation that comes from our feelings of frus- tration in the anonymity of large cities. Cunliffe again: ‘It says [the graffiti says]: I AM, I am real, I have lived here. It says: KIKI, OR DUKE, OR MIKE, OR GINO is alive, he’s doing well and he lives in New York.’ OK, but ‘it’ does not speak like that, it is our bourgeois- existentialist romanticism that speaks like that, the unique and incom- parable being that each of us is, but who gets ground down by the city. Black youths themselves have no personality to defend, from the outset they are defending the community. Their revolt challenges bourgeois identity and anonymity at the same time. COOL COKE SUPERSTRUT SNAKE SODA VIRGIN – this Sioux litany, this subversive litany of anonymity, the symbolic explosion of these war names in the heart of the white city, must be heard and understood. Notes 1. Counterfeit and reproduction always imply an anxiety, a disquieting strangeness. There is unease in front of the photograph, which has been assimilated into a sorcerer’s trickery, an unease, more generally, in front of any technical equipment. Benjamin relates this to the unease bound up with the appearance of a mirror-image. There is already a little sorcery at work in the mirror, but how much more there would be were the image to be detached from the mirror, transported, stockpiled and reproduced at whim (cf. The Student of Prague, where the Devil detaches the student’s image from the mirror and then hunts him down through the intermediary of this image). In this way all repro- duction implies maleficence, from the event of being seduced by one’s own image in 105 The Order of Simulacra the water, like Narcissus, to being haunted by the double, and, who knows, even to the mortal reversal of the vast array of technical equipment that today man disguises in his own image (the narcissistic mirage of technology, as McLuhan says), and that sends back endless halting and distorted reproductions of himself and his power, to the ends of the earth. Reproduction is diabolical in its essence, sending tremors down to our roots. This has hardly changed for us: simulation (which we describe here as the operation of the code) remains and will always remain the site of an immense project of control and death, just as the simulacrum-object (the primitive statue, the image or the photo) has from the outset always had black magic as its objective. 2. Furthermore, there is a flagrant contradiction in Monod’s book, reflecting the ambiguity of all contemporary science: its discourse is directed at the code, that is, at third-order simulacra, but it still follows second-order ‘scientific’ schemata such as objectivity, the scientific ‘ethic’ of knowledge, the truth-principle and the transcendence of science, and so on. These things are all incompatible with third-order models of indeterminacy. 3. ‘The weak “definition” of TV condemns its viewer to rearrange the few points he retains into a kind of abstract work of art. He thereby participates in the creation of a reality which is only pointilistically presented: the televiewer is in the situation of an individual who is asked to project his own phantasma onto inkblots which are not supposed to represent anything.’ TV as a perpetual Rorschach test. Again: ‘The TV image obliges us to always be filling in the blanks on the screen in a convulsive, kinetic and tactile sensory participation.’ 4. ‘The Medium is the Message’ is even the formula of the political economy of the sign when it leads on to third-order simulation. A distinction of the medium from the message remains characteristic of second-order signification. 5. The whole contemporary ‘psychological’ situation is characterised by this short-circuit. The emancipation of children and adolescents, after a first phase of revolt and once the principle of the right to emancipation has been established, appears to be the real emancipation of parents. Youth (students, high school pupils and adolescents) seem to sense this in their increasingly relentless (although also always unreconciled) demands that parents or educators be present and speak. Alone at last, free and responsible, it suddenly occurs to them that in the process the others have pocketed the real freedom. Nor is there any question of simply leaving them in peace. Instead they will be plagued, not by affective or spontaneous material demands but by a demand revised and cor- rected by implicit Oedipal knowledge. A hyperdependency (far greater than the other) distorted by irony and rejection, a parody of the original libidinal mechanisms. A demand without content or reference, unfounded, but so much more ferocious for all that: a naked demand to which there is no possible response. The content of knowledge (education) or affective relations (family), the familial or pedagogic referential having been eliminated during the act of emancipation, remains nothing more than a demand bound up with the empty form of the institution, a perverse, but so much more obsti- nate, demand. A ‘transferential’ desire (that is non- or irreferential), a desire fuelled by lack, by the vacant place, a ‘liberated’ desire, desire caught in its own vertiginous image, a desire to desire thereby also abyssal [en abyme]: a hyperreal desire. Stripped of symbolic substance, desire flows ever more intensely into its double, drawing its energy from its own reflection and from its own disillusionment. That is literally what the ‘demand’ is today, and it is clear that as opposed to ‘classical’ object or transference relations, this demand is insoluble and interminable. Simulated Oedipus. François Richard writes: The students demanded to be seduced, bodily or verbally. But they are also aware of this and play their part ironically. ‘Give your knowledge and your presence: you’ve got the floor, so speak, that’s what you’re there for.’ While this is certainly a protest, that is not all it is: the more authority is contested, the more laugh- able it appears, the greater the demand for an authority in itself. They also play Symbolic Exchange and Death106 Oedipus, so as to be able to annihilate him absolutely. They say that ‘the prof is Papa’ for a laugh, they play at incest, discontented, untouchable, they play the tease, ultimately to be desexualised. Does the analysand constantly demand Oedipus, recite ‘Oedipal’ tricks and have ‘analytic’ dreams in order to respond to the analyst’s supposed demand or to resist him? What about the student doing his ‘Oedipus’ number, his seduction number, familiarly brushing up against the seductee, moving closer in order to dominate? This is not desire, however, but its simulation, a simulated Oedipal psychodrama (but no less real or dramatic for all that). It is quite different when there are real libidinal stakes such as knowledge and power, or even a real work of mourning over knowledge and power (as was able to take place in the universities after ’68). Now is the stage of desperate reproduction, where the stakes are zero and the simulacrum at a maximum, a simulation at once aggravated and parodic, as interminable as psychoanalysis and for the same reasons. Interminable psychoanalysis There is a whole chapter to be added to the history of the transference and the counter- transference concerning their elimination through simulation. This chapter would also deal with the insolubility of the transference and the impossibility of psychoanal- ysis, because it is now psychoanalysis that produces and reproduces the unconscious as its institutional substance. Psychoanalysis too dies from the exchange of uncon- scious signs, just as the revolution dies from the exchange of political-economic signs. This short-circuit was indeed glimpsed by Freud in the form of the gift of the ana- lytic dream or, with a ‘prepared’ analysand, the gift of their analytic knowledge. This was still interpreted as resistance, however, as a detour, and did not fundamentally question the analytic process or the principle of the transference. It is quite differ- ent though when the unconscious itself, the discourse of the unconscious, becomes impossible to find in accordance with the same scenario of simulatory anticipation as we have seen at work at all levels in machines of the third order. Analysis then can no longer be resolved, it becomes logically and historically interminable, since it settles on a substance that is a puppet of reproduction, an unconscious programmed by the demand, an insurmountable instance from which the entire analysis is redistributed. Here again the unconscious’s ‘messages’ have been short-circuited by the ‘medium’ of psychoanalysis. This is a libidinal hyperrealism. We must add the ‘hyperreal’ to the celebrated categories of the real, the symbolic and the imaginary, since it captures and redirects, perverts, the play of the three others. 6. Athenian democracy, far more advanced than our own, logically came to pay for votes as a service, after having tried every other repressive solution to complete the quorum. 7. In this sense it is necessary to undertake a radical critique of Lévi-Strauss’s extension of binary structures as ‘anthropological’ mental structures, and dualistic organisation as the basic structure of primitive societies. The dualistic form with which Lévi-Strauss would like to grace primitive societies is only ever our structural logic, our own code. Indeed, it is the very structure of our domination of ‘archaic’ societies. Lévi-Strauss is kind enough to slip this to them in the form of the mental structures common to the human race. So they will be all the better prepared to receive the baptism of the West. 8. [See also Jean-François Lyotard, Des dispositifs pulsionels, Paris: Christian Bourgeois, 1979, pp. 99–108 – tr.] 9. The coefficient of reality is proportionate to the reserve of the imaginary that gives it its specific weight. This is true of terrestrial as well as space exploration: when there is no more virgin, and hence available to the imaginary, territory, when the map covers the whole territory, something like the reality principle disappears. In this sense, the con- quest of space constitutes an irreversible threshold on the way to the loss of terrestrial references. Reality haemorrhages to the precise extent that the limits of an internally coherent universe are infinitely pushed back. The conquest of space comes after the conquest of the planet, as the last phantasmatic attempt to extend the jurisdiction of 107 The Order of Simulacra the real (for example, when the flag, technology and two-room apartments are carried to the moon); it is even an attempt to substantiate concepts or territorialise the uncon- scious, which is equivalent to the derealisation of human space, or its reversal into a hyperreality of simulation. 10. What about the cool figuration of the metallic caravan and the supermarket so beloved of the hyperrealists, or the Campbell’s soup cans dear to Andy Warhol, or even that of the Mona Lisa when it was satellited into planetary orbit as the absolute model of the earth’s art. The Mona Lisa was not even sent as a work of art, but as a planetary simulacrum where a whole world bears testimony to its existence (testifying, in reality, to its own death) for the gaze of a future universe. 11. [See Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia I, tr. R. Hurley, M. Seem and H.R. Lane, London: Athlone, 1984, and A Thousand Plateaux: Capitalism and Schizophrenia II, tr. Brian Massumi, London: Athlone, 1988, for the BWO – tr.] 12. [In English in the original – tr.] 3 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code The Frivolity of the Déjà Vu The astonishing privilege accorded to fashion is due to a unanimous and definitive resolve. The acceleration of the simple play of signifiers in fashion becomes striking, to the point of enchanting us – the enchantment and vertigo of the loss of every system of reference. In this sense, it is the com- pleted form of political economy, the cycle wherein the linearity of the commodity comes to be abolished. There is no longer any determinacy internal to the signs of fashion, hence they become free to commute and permutate without limit. At the term of this unprecedented enfranchisement, they obey, as if logically, a mad and meticulous recurrence. This applies to fashion as regards clothes, the body and objects – the sphere of ‘light’ signs. In the sphere of ‘heavy’ signs – politics, morals, economics, science, culture, sexuality – the princi- ple of commutation nowhere plays with the same abandon. We could classify these diverse domains according to a decreasing order of ‘simulation’, but it remains the case that every sphere tends, unequally but simultaneously, to merge with models of simulation, of differential and indifferent play, the structural play of value. In this sense, we could say that they are all haunted by fashion, since this can be understood as both the most superficial play and as the most profound social form – the inexorable investment of every domain by the code. In fashion, as in the code, signifieds come unthreaded [se défiler], and the parades of the signifier [les défilés du signifiant] no longer lead any- where. The signifier/signified distinction is erased, as in sexual difference (H.-P. Jeudy, ‘Le signifiant est hermaphrodite’ [in La mort du sens: l’idéol- ogie des mots, Tours/Paris: Mame, 1973]), where gender becomes so many distinctive oppositions, and something like an immense fetishism, bound up with an intense pleasure [jouissance] 1 and an exceptional desolation, takes hold – a pure and fascinating manipulation coupled with the despair of radical indeterminacy. Fundamentally, fashion imposes upon us the rupture of an imaginary order: that of referential Reason in all its guises, and if we are able to enjoy [jouir] the dismantling or stripping of reason [démantélement de la raison], enjoy the liquidation of meaning (particu- larly at the level of our body – hence the affinity of clothing and fashion), enjoy this endless finality of fashion, we also suffer profoundly from the 109 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code corruption of rationality it implies, as reason crumbles under the blow of the pure and simple alternation of signs. There is vehement resistance in the face of the collapse of all sectors into the sphere of commodities, and a still more vehement resistance concerning their collapse into the sphere of fashion. This is because it is in this latter sphere that the liquidation of values is at its most radical. Under the sign of the commodity, all labour is exchanged and loses its specificity – under the sign of fashion, the signs of leisure and labour are exchanged. Under the sign of the commodity, culture is bought and sold – under the sign of fash- ion, all cultures play like simulacra in total promiscuity. Under the sign of the commodity, love becomes prostitution – under the sign of fashion it is the object-relation itself that disappears, blown to pieces by a cool and unconstrained sexuality. Under the sign of the commodity, time is accumu- lated like money – under the sign of fashion it is exhausted and discontinued in entangled cycles. Today, every principle of identity is affected by fashion, precisely because of its potential to revert all forms to non-origin and recurrence. Fashion is always rétro, but always on the basis of the abolition of the passé (the past): the spectral death and resurrection of forms. Its proper actuality (its ‘up-to-dateness’, its ‘relevance’) is not a reference to the present, but an immediate and total recycling. Paradoxically, fashion is the inactual (the ‘out-of-date’, the ‘irrelevant’). It always presupposes a dead time of forms, a kind of abstraction whereby they become, as if safe from time, effective signs which, as if by a twist of time, will return to haunt the present of their inactuality with all the charm of ‘returning’ as opposed to ‘becoming’ structures. The aesthetic of renewal: fashion draws triviality from the death and modernity of the déjà vu. This is the despair that nothing lasts, and the complementary enjoyment of knowing that, beyond this death, every form has always the chance of a second existence, which is never innocent since fashion consumes the world and the real in advance: it is the weight of all the dead labour of signs bearing on living signification – within a magnificent forgetting, a fantastic ignorance [méconnaissance]. But let’s not forget that the fascination exerted by industrial machinery and technics is also due to its being dead labour watching over living labour, all the while devouring it. Our bedazzled misconstrual [méconnaissance] is proportionate to the progressive hold of the dead over the living. Dead labour alone is as strange and as perfect as the déjà vu. The enjoyment of fashion is therefore the enjoyment of a spectral and cyclical world of bygone forms endlessly revived as effective signs. As König says, it is as though fashion were eaten away by a suicidal desire which is fulfilled at the moment when fashion attains its apogee. This is true, but it is a question of a contemplative desire for death, bound to the spectacle of the incessant abolition of forms. What I mean is that the desire for death is itself recycled within fashion, emptying it of every subversive phantasm and involving it, along with everything else, in fashion’s innocuous revolutions. Symbolic Exchange and Death110 Having purged these phantasms which, in the depths of the imaginary, add the bewitchment and charm of a previous life to repetition, fashion dances vertiginously over the surface, on pure actuality. Does fashion recover the innocence that Nietzsche noted in the Greeks: ‘They knew how to live ... to stop ... at the surface, the fold, the skin, to believe in forms, tones, words. … Those Greeks were superficial – out of profundity’ (The Gay Science, Preface, 2nd edition, 1886 [tr. Walter Kaufmann, New York: Random House, 1974], p. 38)? Fashion is only a simulation of the inno- cence of becoming, the cycle of appearances is just its recycling. That the development of fashion is contemporary with that of the museum proves this. Paradoxically, the museum’s demand for an eternal inscription of forms and for a pure actuality function simultaneously in our culture. This is because in modernity both are governed by the status of the sign. Whereas styles mutually exclude each other, the museum is defined by the virtual co-existence of all styles, by their promiscuity within a single cultural super-institution, or, in other words, the commensurability of their values under the sign of the great gold-standard of culture. Fashion does the same thing in accordance with its cycle: it commutes all signs and causes an absolute play amongst them. The temporality of works in the museum is ‘perfect’, it is perfection and the past: it is the highly specific state of what has been and is never actual. But neither is fashion ever actual: it speculates on the recurrence of forms on the basis of their death and their stockpiling, like signs, in an a-temporal reserve. Fashion cobbles together, from one year to the next, what ‘has been’, exercising an enormous combinatory freedom. Hence its effect of ‘instantaneous’ perfection, just like the museum’s per- fection, but the forms of fashion are ephemeral. Conversely, there is a contemporary look to the museum, which causes the works to play amongst themselves like values in a set. Fashion and the museum are contemporary, complicitous. Together they are the opposite of all previous cultures, made of inequivalent signs and incompatible styles. The ‘Structure’ of Fashion Fashion exists only within the framework of modernity, that is to say, in a schema of rupture, progress and innovation. In any cultural context at all, the ancient and the ‘modern’ alternate in terms of their signification. For us how- ever, since the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution, there exists only an historical and polemical structure of change and crisis. It seems that modernity sets up a linear time of technical progress, production and history, and, simultaneously, a cyclical time of fashion. This only seems to be a contra- diction, since in fact modernity is never a radical rupture. Tradition is no longer the pre-eminence of the old over the new: it is unaware of either – modernity itself invents them both at once, at a single stroke, it is always and at the same time ‘neo-’ and ‘rétro-’, modern and anachronistic. The dialectic of rupture very quickly becomes the dynamics of the amalgam and recycling. 111 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code In politics, in technics, in art and in culture it is defined by the exchange rate that the system can tolerate without alteration to its fundamental order. Consequently fashion doesn’t contradict any of this: it very clearly and simul- taneously announces the myth of change, maintaining it as the supreme value in the most everyday aspects, and as the structural law of change: since it is produced through the play of models and distinctive oppositions, and is therefore an order which gives no precedence to the code of the tradition. For binary logic is the essence of modernity, and it impels infinite differenti- ation and the ‘dialectical’ effects of rupture. Modernity is not the trans- mutation but the commutation of all values, their combination and their ambiguity. Modernity is a code, and fashion is its emblem. This perspective allows us to trace only the limits of fashion, in order to conquer the two simultaneous prejudices which consist: 1. in extending its field up to the limits of anthropology, indeed of animal behaviour; 2. in restricting, on the other hand, its actual sphere to dress and external signs. Fashion has nothing to do with the ritual order (nor a fortiori with ani- mal finery), for the good reason that it knows neither the equivalence/ alternation of the old and the new, nor the systems of distinctive opposi- tions, nor the models with their serial and combinatory diffraction. On the other hand, fashion is at the core of modernity, extending even into science and revolution, because the entire order of modernity, from sex to the media, from art to politics, is infiltrated by this logic. The very appearance of fash- ion bears the closest resemblance to ritual – fashion as spectacle, as festival, as squandering – it doesn’t even affirm their differences: since it is precisely the aesthetic perspective that allows us to assimilate fashion to the ceremo- nial (just as it is precisely the concept of festival that allows us to assimilate certain contemporary processes to primitive structures). The aesthetic per- spective is itself a concern of modernity (of a play of distinctive oppositions – utility/gratuity, etc.), one which we project onto archaic structures so as to be better able to annex them under our analogies. Spectacle is our fashion, an intensified and reduplicated sociality enjoying itself aesthetically, the drama of change in place of change. In the primitive order, the ostentation of signs never has this ‘aesthetic’ effect. In the same way, our festival is an ‘aesthetics’ of transgression, which is not the primitive exchange in which it pleases us to find the reflection or the model of our festivals – to rewrite the ‘aesthetics’ of potlach is an ethnocentric rewriting. It is as necessary to distinguish fashion from the ritual order as it is to radicalise the analysis of fashion within our own system. The minimal, super- ficial definition of fashion restricts itself to saying: ‘Within language, the element subject to fashion is not the signification of discourse, but its mimetic support, that is, its rhythm, its tonality, its articulation ... in gesture … This is equally true of intellectual fashions: existentialism or structuralism – it is the vocabulary and not the inquiry that is taken on’ (Edmond Radar, Diogène Symbolic Exchange and Death112 [50, Summer, 1965] ). Thus a deep structure, invulnerable to fashion, is pre- served. Consequently it is in the very production of meaning [sens], in the most ‘objective’ structures, that it must be sought, in the sense that these latter also comply with the play of simulation and combinatory innovation. Even dress and the body grow deeper: now it is the body itself, its identity, its sex, its status, which has become the material of fashion – dress is only a particular case of this. Certainly scientific and cultural popularisations pro- vide fertile soil for the ‘effects’ of fashion. However, along with the ‘originality’ of their procedures, science and culture themselves must be interrogated, to see if they are subject to the ‘structure’ of fashion. If indeed popularisation is possible – which is not the case in any other culture (the facsimile, the digest, the counterfeit, the simulation, the increased circulation of simplified material, is unthinkable at the level of ritual speech, of the sacred text or gesture) – it is because there is, at the very source of innovation in these matters, a manipulation of analytic models, of simple elements and stable oppositions which renders both levels, the ‘original’ and the ‘popularisation’, fundamentally homogeneous, and the distinction between the two purely tactical and moral. Hence Radar does not see that, beyond discourse’s ‘gestures’, the very meaning [sens] of discourse falls beneath the blow of fash- ion as soon as in an entirely self-referential cultural field, concepts are engendered and made to correspond to each other through pure specularity. It may be the same for scientific hypotheses. Nor does psychoanalysis avoid the fate of fashion in the very core of its theoretical and clinical practice. It too goes through the stage of institutional reproduction, developing whatever simulation models it had in its basic concepts. If formerly there was a work of the unconscious, and therefore a determination of psychoanalysis by means of its object, today this has quietly become the determination of the unconscious by means of psychoanalysis itself. Henceforth psychoanalysis reproduces the unconscious, while simultaneously taking itself as its reference (signifying itself as fashion, as the mode). So the unconscious returns to its old habits, as it is generally required to do, and psychoanalysis takes on social force, just as the code does, and is followed by an extraordinary complexification of theories of the unconscious, all commutable and basically indifferent. Fashion has its society: dreams, phantasms, fashionable psychoses, scientific theories, fashionable schools of linguistics, not to mention art and politics – but this is only small change. Fashion haunts the model disciplines more profoundly, indeed to the extent that they have successfully made their axi- oms autonomous for their greater glory, and have moved into an aesthetic, almost a play-acting stage where, as in certain mathematical formulae, only the perfect specularity of the analytic models counts for anything. The Flotation of Signs Contemporary with political economy and like the market, fashion is a universal form. In fashion, all signs are exchanged just as, on the market, all 113 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code products come into play as equivalents. It is the only universalisable sign system, which therefore takes possession of all the others, just as the market eliminates all other modes of exchange. So if in the sphere of fashion no general equivalent can be located, it is because from the outset fashion is situated in an even more formal abstraction than political economy, at a stage when there is not even any need for a perceptible general equivalent (gold or money) because there remains only the form of general equivalence, and that is fashion itself. Or even: a general equivalent is necessary for the quantitative exchange of value, whereas models are required for the exchange of differences. Models are this kind of general equivalent dif- fracted throughout the matrices which govern the differentiated fields of fashion. They are shifters, effectors, dispatchers, the media of fashion, and through them fashion is indefinitely reproduced. There is fashion from the moment that a form is no longer produced according to its own determina- tions, but from the model itself – that is to say, that it is never produced, but always and immediately reproduced. The model itself has become the only system of reference. Fashion is not a drifting of signs – it is their flotation, in the sense in which monetary signs are floated today. This flotation in the economic order is recent: it requires that ‘primitive accumulation’ be everywhere finished, that an entire cycle of dead labour be completed (behind money, the whole economic order will enter into this general relativity). Now this process has been managed for a long time within the order of signs where primitive accumulation is indeed anterior, if not always already given, and fashion expresses the already achieved stage of an accelerated and limitless circula- tion of a fluid and recurrent combinatory of signs, which is equivalent to the instantaneous and mobile equilibrium of floating monies. All cultures, all sign systems, are exchanged and combined in fashion, they contaminate each other, bind ephemeral equilibria, where the machinery breaks down, where there is nowhere any meaning [sens]. Fashion is the pure speculative stage in the order of signs. There is no more constraint of either coherence or reference than there is permanent equality in the conversion of gold into floating monies – this indeterminacy implies the characteristic dimension of the cycle and recurrence in fashion (and no doubt soon in economy), whereas determinacy (of signs or of production) implies a linear and con- tinuous order. Hence the fate of the economic begins to emerge in the form of fashion, which is further down the route of general commutations than money and the economy. The ‘Pulsion’2 of Fashion Were the attempt made to explain fashion by saying that it serves as a vehicle for the unconscious and desire, it would mean nothing if desire itself was ‘in fashion’. In fact there is a ‘pulsion’ of fashion which hasn’t got a great deal to do with the individual unconscious – something so violent that Symbolic Exchange and Death114 no prohibition has ever exhausted it, a desire to have done with meaning [sens] and to be submerged in pure signs, moving towards a raw, immediate sociality. In relation to mediated, economic, etc., social processes, fashion retains something of a radical sociality, not at the level of the psychical exchange of contents, but at the immediate level of the distribution of signs. As La Bruyère has already said: Curiosity is not a taste for the good or the beautiful, but for the rare, for what one has and others have not. It is not an affection for the perfect, but for what is current, for the fashionable. It is not an amusement, but a passion, some- times so violent that it only yields to love and ambition through the modesty of its object. (‘De la Mode 2’ [in J. Benda (ed.), Oeuvres Complètes, Paris: Gallimard, 1951], p. 386) For La Bruyère, the passion for fashion connects the passion for col- lecting with the object-passion: tulips, birds, engravings by Callot. In fact fashion draws nearer to the collection (in those terms) by means of subtle detours, ‘each of which’, for Oscar Wilde, ‘gives man a security which not even religion has given him’. Paying tribute to it, he finds salvation in fashion [faire son salut dans la mode]. A passion for collecting, passion for signs, passion for the cycle (the collection is also a cycle); one line of fashion put into circulation and dis- tributed at dizzying speeds across the entire social body, sealing its integration and taking in all identifications (as the line in collection unifies the subject in one and the same infinitely repeated cyclic process). This force, this enjoyment, takes root in the sign of fashion itself. The semiurgy of fashion rebels against the functionalism of the economic sphere. Against the ethics of production3 stands the aesthetics of manipulation, of the reduplication and convergence of the single mirror of the model: ‘Without content, it [fashion] then becomes the spectacle human beings grant them- selves of their power to make the insignificant signify’ (Barthes, The Fashion System [tr. Mathew Ward and Richard Howard, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983], p. 288). The charm and fascination of fashion derives from this: the decree it proclaims with no other justification but itself. The arbitrary is enjoyed like an election, like class solidarity holding fast to the discrimination of the sign. It is in this way that it diverges radically from the economic while also being its crowning achievement. In relation to the pitiless finality of production and the market, which, however, it also stages, fashion is a festival. It epitomises everything that the regime of economic abstraction censures. It inverts every categorical imperative. In this sense, it is spontaneously contagious, whereas economic calcula- tion isolates people from one another. Disinvesting signs of all value, it becomes passion again – passion for the artificial. It is the utter absurdity, the formal futility of the sign of fashion, the perfection of a system where noth- ing is any longer exchanged against the real, it is the arbitrariness of this sign at the same time as its absolute coherence, constrained to a total relativity with other signs, that makes for its contagious virulence and, at the same time, its collective enjoyment. Beyond the rational and the irrational, beyond 115 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code the beautiful and the ugly, the useful and the useless, it is this immorality in relation to all criteria, the frivolity which at times gives fashion its subversive force (in totalitarian, puritan or archaic contexts), which always, in contra- distinction to the economic, makes it a total social fact – for which reason we are obliged to revive, as Mauss did for exchange, a total approach. Fashion, like language, is aimed from the outset at the social (the dandy, in his provocative solitude, is the a contrario proof of this). But, as opposed to language, which aims for meaning [sens] and effaces itself before it, fashion aims for a theatrical sociality, and delights in itself. At a stroke, it becomes an intense site from which no-one is excluded – the mirror of a certain desire for its own image. In contradistinction to language, which aims at communication, fashion plays at it, turning it into the goal-less stake of a signification without a message. Hence its aesthetic pleasure, which has nothing to do with beauty or ugliness. Is it then a sort of festival, an increasing excess of communication? It is especially fashion in dress, playing over the signs of the body, that appears ‘festive’, through its aspect of ‘wasteful consumption’, of ‘potlach’. Again this is especially true of haute couture. This is what allows Vogue to make this tasty profession of faith: What is more anachronistic, more dream-laden than a sailing ship? Haute couture. It discourages the economist, takes up a stance contrary to productiv- ity techniques, it is an affront to democratisation. With superb languor, a maximum number of highly qualified people produce a minimum number of models of complex cut, which will be repeated, again with the same languor, twenty times in the best of cases, or not at all in the worst. ... Perhaps two million dresses. ‘But why this debauchery of effort?’ you say. ‘Why not?’ answer the creators, the craftsmen, the workers and the four thousand clients, all possessed by the same passion for seeking perfection. Couturiers are the last adventurers of the modern world. They cultivate the acte gratuit. ... ‘Why haute couture?’ a few detractors may think. ‘Why champagne?’ Again: ‘Neither practice nor logic can justify the extravagant adventure of clothes. Superfluous and therefore necessary, the world is once more the province of religion.’ Potlach, religion, indeed the ritual enchantment of expression, like that of costume and animal dances: everything is good for exalting fashion against the economic, like a transgression into a play-act sociality. We know, however, that advertising too wants a ‘feast of consumption’, the media a ‘feast of information’, the markets a ‘feast of production’, etc. The art market and horse races can also be taken for potlach – ‘Why not?’ asks Vogue. We would like to see a functional squandering everywhere so as to bring about symbolic destruction. Because of the extent to which the economic, shackled to the functional, has imposed its principle of utility, anything which exceeds it quickly takes on the air of play and futility. It is hard to acknowledge that the law of value extends well beyond the eco- nomic, and that its true task today is the jurisdiction of all models. Wherever there are models, there is an imposition of the law of value, repression by signs and the repression of signs by themselves. This is why there is a radical difference between the symbolic ritual and the signs of fashion. In primitive Symbolic Exchange and Death116 cultures signs openly circulate over the entire range of ‘things’, there has not yet been any ‘precipitation’ of a signified, nor therefore of a reason or a truth of the sign. The real – the most beautiful of our connotations – does not exist. The sign has no ‘underworld’, it has no unconscious (which is both the last and the most subtle of connotations and rationalisations). Signs are exchanged without phantasms, with no hallucination of reality. Hence they have nothing in common with the modern sign whose par- adox Barthes has defined: ‘The overwhelming tendency is to convert the perceptible into a signifier, towards ever more organised, closed systems. Simultaneously and in equal proportion, the sign and its systematic nature is disguised as such, it is rationalised, referred to a reason, to an agency in the world, to a substance, to a function’ (cf. The Fashion System, p. 285). With simulation, signs merely disguise the real and the system of reference as a sartorial supersign. The real is dead, long live the realistic sign! This paradox of the modern sign induces a radical split between it and the mag- ical or ritual sign, the same one as is exchanged in the mask, the tattoo or the feast. Even if fashion is an enchantment, it remains the enchantment of the commodity, and, still further, the enchantment of simulation, the code and the law. Sex Refashioned There is nothing less certain than that sexuality invests dress, make-up, etc. – or rather it is a modified sexuality that comes into play at the level of fashion. If the condemnation of fashion takes on this puritan violence, it is not aimed at sex. The taboo bears on futility, on the passion for futility and the artificial which is perhaps more fundamental than the sexual drives. In our culture, tethered as it is to the principle of utility, futility plays the role of transgression and violence, and fashion is condemned for having within it the force of the pure sign which signifies nothing. Its sexual provocation is secondary with regard to this principle which denies the grounds of our culture. Of course, the same taboo is also brought to bear on ‘futile’ and non- reproductive sexuality, but there is a danger in crystallising on sex, a danger that puritan tactics, which aim to change the stakes to sexuality, may be prolonged – whereas it is at the level of the reality principle itself, of the referential principle in which the unconscious and sexuality still participate, that fashion confrontationally sets up its pure play of differences. To place sexuality at the forefront of this history is once again to neutralise the sym- bolic by means of sex and the unconscious. It is according to this same logic that the analysis of fashion has traditionally been reduced to that of dress, since it allows the sexual metaphor the greatest play. Consequences of this diversion: the game is reduced to a perspective of sexual ‘liberation’, which is quite simply achieved in a ‘liberation’ of dress. And a new cycle of fashion begins again. 117 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code Fashion is certainly the most efficient neutraliser of sexuality (one never touches a woman in make-up – see ‘The Body, or The Mass Grave of Signs’ below) – precisely because it is a passion which is not complicitous, but in competition with sex (and, as La Bruyère has already noted, fashion is vic- torious over sex). Therefore the passion for fashion, in all its ambiguity, will come to play on the body confused with sex. Fashion grows deeper as it ‘stages’ the body, as the body becomes the medium of fashion.4 Formerly the repressed sanctuary, the repression ren- dering it undecodable, from now on it too is invested. The play of dress is effaced before the play of the body, which itself is effaced before the play of models. 5 All at once dress loses the ceremonial character (which it still had up until the eighteenth century) bound up with the usage of signs qua signs. Eaten away by the body’s signifieds, by this ‘transpearence’ of the body as sexuality and nature, dress loses the fantastic exuberance it has had since the primitive societies. It loses its force as pure disguise, it is neu- tralised by the necessity that it must signify the body, it becomes a reason. The body too is neutralised in this operation however. It too loses the power of disguise that it used to have in tattooing and costume. It no lon- ger plays with anything save its proper truth, which is also its borderline: its nudity. In costumery, the signs of the body, mixed openly with the signs of the not-body, play. Thereafter, costume becomes dress, and the body becomes nature. Another game is set up – the opposition of dress and the body – designation and censure (the same fracture as between the signifier and the signified, the same play of displacement and allusion). Fashion strictly speaking begins with this partition of the body, repressed and sig- nified in an allusive way – it also puts an end to all this in the simulation of nudity, in nudity as the model of the simulation of the body. For the Indian, the whole body is a face, that is, a promise and a symbolic act, as opposed to nudity, which is only sexual instrumentality. This new reality of the body as hidden sex is from the outset merged with woman’s body. The concealed body is feminine (not biologically of course; rather mythologically). The conjunction of fashion and woman, since the bourgeois, puritan era, reveals therefore a double indexation: that of fashion on a hidden body, that of woman on a repressed sex. This con- junction did not exist (or not so much) until the eighteenth century (and not at all, of course, in ceremonial societies) – and for us today it is begin- ning to disappear. As for us, when the destiny of a hidden sex and the forbidden truth of the body arises, when fashion itself neutralises the oppo- sition between the body and dress, then the affinity of woman and fashion progressively diminishes6 – fashion is generalised and becomes less and less the exclusive property of one sex or of one age. Be wary, for it is a matter neither of progress nor of liberation. The same logic still applies, and if fashion is generalised and leaves the privileged medium of woman so as to be open to all, the prohibition placed on the body is also generalised in a more subtle form than puritan repression: in the form of general desexual- isation. For it was only under repression that the body had strong sexual Symbolic Exchange and Death118 potential: it then appeared as a captivating demand. Abandoned to the signs of fashion, the body is sexually disenchanted, it becomes a mannequin, a term whose lack of sexual discrimination suits its meaning well.7 The man- nequin is sex in its entirety, but sex without qualities. Fashion is its sex. Or rather, it is in fashion that sex is lost as difference but is generalised as ref- erence (as simulation). Nothing is sexed any longer, everything is sexualised. The masculine and the feminine themselves rediscover, having once lost their particularity, the chance of an unlimited second existence. Hence, in our culture alone, sexuality impregnates all signification, and this is because signs have, for their part, invested the entire sexual sphere. In this way the current paradox becomes clear: we simultaneously witness the ‘emancipation’ of woman and a fresh upsurge of fashion. This is because fashion has only to do with the feminine, and not with women. Society in its entirety is becoming feminine to the extent that discrimination against women is coming to an end (as it is for madmen, children, etc., being the normal consequence of the logic of exclusion). Hence prendre son pied, at once ‘to find one’s feet’, and a familiar French expression of the female orgasm [jouissance], has now become generalised, while simultaneously, of course, destabilising its signification. We must also note however, that woman can only be ‘liberated’ and ‘emancipated’ as ‘force of pleasure’ and ‘force of fashion’, exactly as the proletariat is only ever liberated as the ‘labour force’. The above illusion is radical. The historical definition of the feminine is formed on the basis of the destiny of the body and sex bound up with fashion. The historical liberation of the feminine can only be the reali- sation of this destiny writ large (which immediately becomes the liberation of the whole world, without however losing its discriminatory character). At the same moment that woman accesses a universal labour modelled on the proletariat, the whole world also accesses the emancipation of sex and fash- ion, modelled on women. We can immediately, and clearly, see that fashion is a labour, to which it becomes necessary to accord equal historical impor- tance to ‘material’ labour. It is also of capital importance (which by the same token becomes part of capital!) to produce commodities in accordance with the market, and to produce the body in accordance with the rules of sex and fashion. The division of labour won’t settle where we think, or rather there is no division of labour at all: the production of the body, the production of death, the production of signs and the production of commodities – these are only modalities of one and the same system. Doubtless it is even worse in fashion: for if the worker is divided from himself under the signs of exploitation and of the reality principle, woman is divided from herself and her body under the signs of beauty and the pleasure principle! The Insubvertible History says, or so the story goes, that the critique of fashion (O. Burgelin) was a product of conservative thinking in the nineteenth century, but that 119 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code today, with the advent of socialism, this critique has been revived by the left. The one went with religion and the other with revolution. Fashion corrupts morals, fashion abolishes the class struggle. Although this critique of fashion may have passed over to the left, it does not necessarily signify an historical reversal: perhaps it signifies that with regard to morality and morals, the left has quite simply taken over from the right, and that, in the name of the revolution, it has adopted the moral order and its classic prej- udices. Ever since the principle of revolution entered into morals, quite a categorical imperative, the whole political order, even the left, has become a moral order. Fashion is immoral, this is what’s in question, and all power (or all those who dream of it) necessarily hates it. There was a time when immo- rality was recognised, from Machiavelli to Stendhal, and when somebody like Mandeville could show, in the eighteenth century, that a society could only be revolutionized through its vices, that it is its immorality that gives it its dynamism. Fashion still holds to this immorality: it knows nothing of value-systems, nor of criteria of judgement: good and evil, beauty and ugliness, the rational/irrational – it plays within and beyond these, it acts therefore as the subversion of all order, including revolutionary rationality. It is power’s hell, the hell of the relativity of all signs which all power is forced to crush in order to maintain its own signs. Thus fashion is taken on by contemporary youth, as a resistance to every imperative, a resistance without an ideology, without objectives. On the other hand, there is no possible subversion of fashion since it has no system of reference to contradict (it is its own system of reference). We cannot escape fashion (since fashion itself makes the refusal of fashion into a fashion feature – blue-jeans are an historical example of this). While it is true that one can always escape the reality principle of the content, one can never escape the reality principle of the code. Even while rebelling against the con- tent, one more and more closely obeys the logic of the code. Why so? It is the diktat of ‘modernity’. Fashion leaves no room for revolution except to go back over the very genesis of the sign that constitutes it. Furthermore, the alternative to fashion does not lie in a ‘liberty’ or in some kind of step beyond towards a truth of the world and systems of reference. It lies in a deconstruc- tion of both the form of the sign of fashion and the principle of signification itself, just as the alternative to political economy can only lie in the decon- struction of the commodity/form and the principle of production itself. Notes 1. [I have translated the French noun jouissance and the verb jouir, whose admixture of libidinal and political economy is well known in contemporary French theory, variously according to context. In the main I have translated it as ‘enjoyment’; sometimes as ‘intense pleasure’, with the French following in brackets. – tr.] 2. [Pulsion is the French translation of Freud’s Trieb, which the Standard Edition translates as ‘instinct’, a move which for many reasons has been found inadequate. The current translation Symbolic Exchange and Death120 is ‘drive’, which I have sometimes used for reasons of euphony. The French pulsion, however, seems preferable since it confers a less mechanistically dominated energetics than does ‘drive’. These are the only options used throughout the present text. – tr.] 3. But we have seen that the economic today conforms with the same indeterminacy, ethics drops out in aid of a ‘finality without end’ of production whereby it rejoins the vertigi- nous futility of fashion. We may say then of production what Barthes says of fashion: ‘The system then abandons the meaning yet does so without giving up any of the spectacle of signification’ [The Fashion System, p. 288, J.B.’s emphasis]. 4. The three modalities of the ‘body of fashion’ cited by Barthes (cf. The Fashion System, pp. 258–9): 1. It is a pure form, with no attributes of its own, tautologically defined by dress. 2. Or: every year we decree that a certain body (a certain type of body) is in fashion. This is another way of making the two coincide. 3. We develop dress in such a way that it transforms the real body and makes it signify the ideal body of fashion. These modalities more or less correspond to the historical evolution of the status of the model: from the initial, but non-professional model (the high-society woman) to the pro- fessional mannequin whose body also plays the role of a sexual model up until the latest (current) phase where everybody has become a mannequin – each is called, summoned to invest their bodies with the rules of the game of fashion – the whole world is an ‘agent’ of fashion, just as the whole world becomes a productive agent. General effusion of fashion to all and sundry and at every level of signification. It is also possible to tie these phases of fashion in with the phases of the successive concentration of capital, with the structuration of the economic sphere of fashion (var- iation of fixed capital, of the organic composition of capital, the speed of the rotation of commodities, of finance capital and industrial capital – cf. Utopie, Oct. 1971, no. 4). However, the analytic principle of this interaction of the economic and signs is never clear. More than in the direct relation with the economic, it is in a sort of movement homologous to the extension of the market that the historical extension of the sphere of fashion can be seen: 1. In the beginning fashion is concerned only with scattered details, minimal varia- tions, supported by marginal categories, in a system which remains essentially homoge- neous and traditional (just as in the first phase of political economy only the surplus of a yield is exchanged, which in other circumstances is largely exhausted in consumption within the group – a very weak section of the free labour force and the salariat). Fashion then is what is outside culture, outside the group, the foreigner, it is the city-dweller to the country-dweller, etc. 2. Fashion progressively and virtually integrates all the signs of culture, and regu- lates the exchange of signs, just as in a second phase all material production is virtually integrated by political economy. Both systems anterior to production and exchange are effaced in the universal dimension of the market. All cultures come to play within fash- ion’s universality. In this phase fashion’s reference is the dominant cultural class, which administers the distinctive values of fashion. 3. Fashion is diffused everywhere and quite simply becomes the way of life [le mode de vie]. It invests every sphere which had so far escaped it. The whole world supports and reproduces it. It recuperates its own negativity (the fact of not being in fashion), it becomes its own signified (like production at the stage of reproduction). In a certain way, however, it is also its end. 5. For it is not true that a dress or a supple body stocking which lets the body ‘play’ ‘frees’ something or other: in the order of signs, this is a supplementary adulteration. To denude structures is not to return to the zero degree of truth, it is to wrap them in a new signi- fication which gets added to all the others. So it will be the beginning of a new cycle of forms. So much for the cycle of formal innovation, so much for the logic of fashion, and 121 Fashion, or the Enchanting Spectacle of the Code no-one can do anything about it. To ‘liberate’ structures (of the body, the unconscious, the functional truth of the object in design, etc.) still amounts to clearing the way for the universalisation of the system of fashion (it is the only universalisable system, the only one that can control the circulation of every sign, including contradictory ones). A bourgeois revolution in the system of forms, with the appearance of a bourgeois political revolution; this too clears the way for the universalisation of the system of the market. 6. There are of course other, social and historical, reasons for this affinity: woman’s (or youths’) marginality or her social relegation. But this is no different: social repression and a malefic sexual aura are always brought together under the same categories. 7. [The French mannequin signifies a masculine, a feminine and a neuter; a man with no strength of character who is easily led, a woman employed by a large couturier to pres- ent models wearing its new collection, and an imitation human. Its gender is masculine (le mannequin). – tr.] 4 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs A Sex is a mass grave of Signs The Sign is a disembodied Sex The Marked Body The entire contemporary history of the body is the history of its demarcation, the network of marks and signs that have since covered it, divided it up, annihilated its difference and its radical ambivalence in order to organise it into a structural material for sign-exchange, equal to the sphere of objects, to resolve its playful virtuality and its symbolic exchange (not to be con- fused with sexuality) into sexuality taken as a determining agency, a phallic agency entirely organised around the fetishisation of the phallus as the general equivalent. In this sense, the body is, under the sign of sexuality as it is currently understood, that is, under the sign of its ‘liberation’, caught up in a process whose functioning and strategy themselves derive from political economics. Fashion, advertising, nude-look, nude theatre, strip-tease: the play- script of erection and castration is everywhere. It has an absolute variety and an absolute monotony. Ankle boots and thigh boots, a short coat under a long coat, over the elbow gloves and stocking-tops on the thigh, hair over the eyes or the stripper’s G-string, but also bracelets, necklaces, rings, belts, jewels and chains – the scenario is the same everywhere: a mark that takes on the force of a sign and thereby even a perverse erotic function, a boundary to figure castration which parodies castration as the symbolic articulation of lack, under the structural form of a bar articulat- ing two full terms (which then on either side play the part of the signifier and the signified in the classical economy of the sign). The bar makes a zone of the body work as its corresponding terms here. This is not an erogenous zone at all, but an erotic, eroticised zone, a fragment erected into the phallic signifier of a sexuality that has become a pure and simple concept, a pure and simple signified. In this fundamental schema, analogous to that of the linguistic sign, castration is signified (it passes into the state of a sign) and therefore subject to misrecognition [méconnaissance]. The nude and the not-nude play in a structural opposition and thus contribute to the designation of the fetish. The image of the stocking top on the thigh derives its erotic potential not from the proximity of the real genital and its positive 123 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs promise (from this naïve functionalist perspective, the naked thigh would have to play the same role), but from the apprehension surround- ing the genitals (the panic of recognising castration) being arrested in a staged castration. The innocuous mark, the line of the stocking above which, instead of lack, ambivalence and the chasm, there is nothing more than a sexual plenitude. The naked thigh and, metonymically, the entire body has become a phallic effigy by means of this caesura, a fetish- istic object to be contemplated and manipulated, deprived of all its menace.1 As in fetishism, desire can then be fulfilled at the cost of warding off castration and the death drive. Eroticisation always consists in the erectility of a fragment of the barred body, in a phallic phantasmatisation of everything beyond the bar in the position of the signifier and the simultaneous reduction of sexuality to the rank of the signified (represented value). A reassuring structural conjuring operation enables the subject to be recovered as phallus, to identify him- self with and reappropriate this fragment of the body, or the entire positivised, fetishised body in the fulfilment of a desire that will for ever misconstrue his proper loss. We can read this operation in the slightest detail. The tight-fitting brace- let round the arm or the ankle, the belt, the necklace and the ring establish the foot, the waist, the neck or the finger as erectile parts. Ultimately there is no further need for a mark or a visible sign: stripped of signs, it is never- theless on the basis of a phantasmatic separation, thus tricking and eluding castration, that the body’s eroticity functions exclusively in nudity. Even if the body is not structuralised by some mark (a jewel, some make-up or a wound can all work to this end), even if it is not fragmented, the bar is always there as the clothes come off, signalling the emergence of the body as phallus, even if, or, rather, especially if, it is a woman’s body: this is the whole art of strip-tease, which we will come back to later. We should reinterpret so-called Freudian ‘symbolism’ in this sense. It is not by virtue of their protuberant form that the foot, finger, nose or some other part of the body may act as metaphors for the penis (in accordance with a schema of analogy between these diverse signifiers and the real penis): rather, their phallic value rests solely on the basis of phantasmatic cut that erects them (the ‘castrated’ penis is a penis because it is cas- trated). Full, phallicised terms marked out by the bar that makes them autonomous. Everything beyond this bar is the phallus, everything is resolved into a phallic equivalent, even the female genitals, or any gaping organ or object traditionally listed as a symbol of the ‘feminine’. The body is not arranged into masculine or feminine symbols: at a much deeper level, it is the site of the drama and the denial of castration, illustrated by the Chinese custom (cited by Freud in ‘Fetishism’ [in Standard Edition, ed. and tr. James Strachey, London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psychoanalysis, Vol. 21, 1961]) where, beginning by mutilating a woman’s foot, they then venerate the mutilated foot as a fetish. The entire body is susceptible to innumerable forms of marking and mutilation, 2 followed by Symbolic Exchange and Death124 phallic veneration (erotic exaltation). This, rather than the anamorphosis of the genital organs, is where the body’s secret lies. In this way, rouged lips are phallic (face paint and make-up are pre-eminent in the arsenal of the body’s structural enhancement). A made-up mouth no longer speaks, its beatified lips, half open, half closed, are no longer used for speaking, eating, vomiting or kissing. Beyond these always ambivalent exchange functions – introjection and rejection – and on the basis of their denegation, the perverse erotic and cultural function is established. This fascinating mouth, like an artificial sign, like cultural labour, the game and the rules of the game, neither speaks nor eats, and no-one kisses it. The painted mouth, objectified like a jewel, derives its intense erotic value not, as one might imagine, from accentuating its role as an erotogenic orifice, but conversely from its closure – paint being as it were the trace of the phallic, the mark that institutes its phallic exchange-value: an erectile mouth, a sexual tumescence whereby woman becomes erect and man’s desire will be received in its own image.3 Mediated by this structural labour, desire, implacable as it is when it is based on loss, on the void between one and the other, becomes negotiable in terms of signs and exchanged phallic values, indexed on a general phallic equivalent where each party operates in accordance with a contract and converts its own enjoyment into cash in terms of a phallic accumulation: a perfect situation for a political economy of desire. The same holds true for the gaze. The strand of hair falling over the eye (and every other ocular erotic artifact) implements the denegation of the gaze as the unending dimension of castration and, at the same time, as an amorous offering. When the eyes are metamorphosed by make-up, there is an ecstatic reduction of the threat and the gaze of the other where the subject may be reflected in his proper lack, but where he may also be vertiginously eliminated if these eyes open on him. These sophis- ticated eyes, these Medusa’s 4 eyes, gaze at nobody, they don’t open onto anything. Caught in the labour of the sign, they possess the sign’s redun- dancy: they revel in their own fascination, and their seduction derives from this perverse onanism. We could go on: what is true of these privileged sites of symbolic exchange (the mouth and the gaze) is also true of any part of the body whatever when it is caught in the process of erotic signification. But the most beautiful object, which always epitomises this mise-en-scène and seems to be the key to the vault of the political economy of the body, is the female body. The female body unveiled in the thousand variants of eroticism is obviously the emer- gence of the phallus, the fetish-object, an immense labour of phallic simulation at the same time as the endlessly repeated spectacle of castration. With the immense diffusion of images in the meticulous ritual of the strip- tease, the smooth and faultless potency [puissance] of the exhibited female body always functions as a phallic display, a potency medusified, paralysed, by a relentless phallic demand (hence the profound imaginary affinity between the escalation of the erotic and productivist growth). 125 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs The erotic privilege of the female body works for women just as much as for men. In fact, a single perverse structure works for everyone: centred on the denial of castration, it works with the female body as with the immanence of castration. 5 Thus the logical progression of the system (here once again homologous to political economy) leads to an erotic recrudes- cence of the female body because it best lends itself to phallic general equivalence, being deprived of a penis. The male body is not subject to the same erotic return (far from it) because it permits neither the fascinating reminder of castration, nor the spectacle of constantly overcoming it. It can never really become a smooth, closed and perfect object since it is stamped with the ‘true’ mark (the one the general system valorises) and in conse- quence is less susceptible to demarcation, to this long task of phallic formation. Of course, it is by no means certain that one day it too may be actualised as a phallic variation. We are approaching a new order where there is no erectile advertising nor any erectile nudity: it is at this cost that there can be a controlled transfer of erectility across the entire spectrum of objects, including the female body. At the limit, the erection itself is not incompatible with the system. 6 We must see how, in woman’s erotic ‘privilege’, historical and social subjection operate. Not by some mechanism of ‘alienation’ like a double of social alienation, but by trying to see if the same process of misrecognition [méconnaissance] works towards all political discrimination as towards sexual difference in fetishism, resulting in a fetishism of class or of the dominated group, along with a sexual overvaluation so as to better stave off the crucial examination that it conducts of the order of power. If such reflections are accurate then all signifying material of the erotic order is made up of nothing but the outfits of slaves (chains, collars, whips, etc.), savages (negritude, bronzed skin, nudity, tattooing) and all the signs of the dominated classes and races. This is how it is for the woman in her body, annexed to a phallic order which, when expressed in political terms, condemns her to a non-existence.7 Secondary Nudity Any body or part of the body can operate functionally in the same way, provided that it is subject to the same erotic discipline: it is necessary and sufficient that it be as closed and as smooth as possible, faultless, without orifice and ‘lacking’ nothing, every erogenous difference being conjured up by the structural bar that will design(ate) this body (in the double sense of ‘designate’ and ‘design’), visible in clothing, jewellery or make-up, invisible but always present in complete nudity, since it then envelops the body like a second skin. The ubiquity of phrases such as ‘almost naked’, ‘naked without being naked, as if you were naked’ and the tights in which ‘you are more naked than is natural’ in the discourse of advertising is characteristic of this. Symbolic Exchange and Death126 This is all in order to reconcile the naturalist ideal of living ‘in touch with’ your body with the commercial imperative of surplus-value. It is much more interesting, however, to note that in this discourse nudity is defined as secondary nudity, the nudity of tights X or Y, of the veil so transparent that ‘their transparency even affects you’. Moreover, this nudity is very often relayed by the mirror – in any case, it is in this reduplication that the woman is united with ‘the body of her dreams: her own’. And for once the advertising myth is absolutely right: there is no nudity other than that which is reduplicated in signs, which envelops itself in its signified truth and reconstructs, like a mirror, the fundamental rule of the body as erotic matter, the nudity of becoming, in order to be phallically celebrated, the diaphanous, smooth, depilated substance of a glorious and unsexed body. The James Bond film Goldfinger provides a perfect example of this. In it, a woman is painted in gold, all her orifices are blocked up in a radical make-up, making her body a flawless phallus (that the make-up should be gold only emphasises the homology with political economy), which of course amounts to death. The nude gold-varnished playgirl will die by having incarnated to an absurd extent the phantasm of the erotic, but this is the case for every skin in functional aesthetics, in the mass culture of the body. ‘Body hugging’ tights, girdles, stockings, gloves, dresses and clothes, not to mention sun-tans: the leitmotiv of the ‘second skin’ and the transparent pellicle always come to vitrify the body. The skin itself is defined not as ‘nudity’ but as an erogenous zone, a sen- suous medium of contact and exchange, a metabolism of absorption and excretion. The body does not stop at this porous skin, full of holes and orifices; only metaphysics institutes it as the borderline of the body. This body is denied in the interests of a second, non-porous skin that neither exudes nor excretes,8 that is, neither hot nor cold (it is ‘cool’ and ‘warm’: optimally air-conditioned), with no proper density (a clear or, in French, ‘transparent’ complexion), and above all without orifices (it is smooth). As functional as a cellophane wrapper. All these qualities (coolness, suppleness, transparency, one-piece) are qualities of closure, a zero degree resulting from the denegation of ambivalent extremes. The same goes for the ‘youth’ of the body, which will neutralise the old-young paradigm in an eternal youth of simulation. The vitrification of nudity is related to the obsessional function of the protective wax or plastic coating of objects and the labour of scrubbing and cleaning intended to keep them in a constant state of propriety, of flawless abstraction. In both cases, vitrification and protection, it is a matter of blocking secretions (patina, oxidisation, dust), preventing them from col- lapsing and maintaining them in a sort of abstract immortality. ‘Design(at)ed’ nudity implies that there is nothing behind the lattice of signs that it weaves, especially not a body: neither a body of labour, nor a body of pleasure; neither an erogenous body nor a broken body. It formally exceeds all that in a simulacrum of the pacified body, just like Brigitte Bardot, who is ‘beautiful because she fits her dress exactly’ – a functional 127 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs equation without any unknown factors. As opposed to the rent skin and torn muscles of the anatomical body, the modern body comes much more under the heading of the inflatable, a theme illustrated by a cartoon strip in Lui where we see a stripper, her clothes scattered on the floor around her, making one final gesture: she ‘uncorks’ her navel and deflates immediately, leaving only a small heap of skin on the stage. A utopia of nudity, of the body present in its truth: this is at most the ideology of the body that can be represented. The Indian (I no longer know which one) said: ‘The naked body is an expressionless mask hiding each of our true natures.’ By this he meant that the body only has meaning when it is marked, covered in inscriptions. Alphonse Allais’ Rajah, a fanatic for denotation and truth, translated this contrariwise: not content to have made the dancing girl undress, he flays her alive. The body is not at all the surface of being, a virginal beach without tracks, nature. It has only taken on this ‘original’ value through repression: and so, to liberate the body as such in accordance with naturalist illusions is to liberate it as repressed. Even in nudity, the body turns back on itself, shroud- ing itself with an ethereal and ineluctable censorship: the second skin. For the skin, like every sign that takes on the value of a sign, is doubled through signification: it is always already the second skin, not the final skin, but always the only one. In the redundancy of the nudity-sign, which works towards a reconstruc- tion of the body as a phantasm of totalisation, we again find the infinite speculation of the conscious subject through its mirror-image, capturing and bringing a formal resolution to the insurmountable division of the sub- ject in this reduplication. The signs inscribed on the body, where the death drive is also tangentially inscribed, merely repeat the metaphysical opera- tions of the conscious subject on corporeal material. ‘By beating our skins we beat metaphysics back into our brains’, as Artaud said. Closure of the mirror, phallic reduplication of the mark: in both cases the subject is seduced by itself. It seduces its own desire and conjures it up in its own body, doubled in signs. Behind the exchange of signs, behind the labour of the code which functions as a fortification of the phallic, the sub- ject can hide away and recover its strength: shying away from the desire of the other (from its own lack), and, as it were, to see (to see oneself) without being seen. The logic of the sign meets the logic of perversion. It is important here to make a radical distinction between the labour of inscription and the mark at the level of the body in ‘primitive’ societies and that which takes place in our current system. They are too easily mixed up in the category of the ‘symbolic expression’ of the body. As if the body had always been what it is, as if archaic tattooing had the same meaning as make-up, as if, beyond all the revolutions of the mode of production, there existed an unexchanged mode of signification at the basis of every age extend- ing even into the sphere of political economy. In archaic society, as opposed to our own, where signs are exchanged under the regime of the general equivalent, where they have an exchange-value in a system of phallic abstraction and of Symbolic Exchange and Death128 the imaginary saturation of the subject, marking the body as a masking prac- tice, all have the function of immediately actualising symbolic exchange, gift-exchange with the gods or within the group. Here, negotiation is not a negotiation of identity by the subject behind the mask, nor the manipulation of the sign: on the contrary, it consumes the subject’s identity and, like the subject, enters the game of possession and dispossession, the entire body becoming, just like gods and women, material for symbolic exchange. Finally, within this standard schema of signification, our transcendental Signifier/Signified, our Phallus/ Subjectivity, which governs our entire political economy of the body, has not yet emerged. When the Indian (perhaps the same one) says ‘every- thing is a face to me’, in response to the white man’s questions as to why he is naked, he is saying that his entire body (which, as we have seen is never nude) is given over to symbolic exchange, while for us, nudity has a tendency to be reduced to a single face and a single look. For the Indian, bodies gaze at each other and exchange all their signs. These signs are consumed in an inces- sant relaying and refer neither to a transcendental law of value, nor to a private appropriation of the subject. For us, the body is sealed in signs, increasing its value through a calculus of signs that it exchanges under the law of equiva- lence and the reproduction of the subject. The subject is no longer eliminated in the exchange, it speculates. The subject, not the savage, is enmeshed in fetishism: through the investment [faire-valoir] of its body, it is the subject that is fetishised by the law of value. Strip-tease Bernardin (manager of the Crazy Horse Saloon): You neither strip nor tease … you parody … I am a hoaxer: you give the impression of giving the naked truth, there could not be a greater hoax. This is the opposite of life, because when she is nude, she has many more adornments than when she is dressed. Bodies are made up with extremely beautiful special foundations, leaving the skin satin smooth … She has gloves that cut off on her arms, which is always so beautiful, green, red or black stockings on her legs, also cut off at the thigh. … Dream strip-tease: the space-woman. She was dancing in the void. Because the more slowly a woman dies, the more erotic it is. So I believe that this would reach its apex with a woman in a state of weightlessness. Beach nudity has nothing to do with stage nudity. On stage the women are goddesses, they are untouchable. … The wave of nudity sweeping through the theatre and elsewhere is superficial, it is limited to a mental act: I am going to take my clothes off, I am going to show nude actors and actresses. Precisely these limits make it uninteresting. Other people present reality: here, I am only suggesting the impossible. The reality of sex which is flaunted everywhere, diminishes the subjectivity of eroticism. Iridescent under intense lights, embellished by a voluminous orange wig, the whole thing set off with jewels, Usha Barock, an Austrian-Polish half- caste, will continue the tradition of the Crazy Horse: creating what you cannot hold in your arms. 129 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs The strip-tease is a dance, perhaps the only one, and definitely the most original in the contemporary Western world. Its secret is a woman’s auto-erotic celebration of her own body, which becomes desirable in exact proportion to the intensity of this celebration. Without this narcis- sistic mirage that is the substance of every gesture, without this gestural repertoire of caresses that come to envelop the body, making it into an emblem as a phallic object, there would be no erotic effect. A sublime masturbation whose slow pace, as Bernardin said, is fundamental. This slow pace marks the fact that the gestures with which the girl covers her- self (stripping, caressing, even as far as mimicking orgasm [jouissance]), come from ‘the other’. Her gestures weave a phantom sexual partner around her. By the same token, however, the other is excluded, since she replaces it and appropriates its gestures for herself following a work of condensation which is not in fact far removed from dream-processes. The whole erotic secret (and labour) of the strip lies in this evocation and revocation of the other, through gestures so slow as to be poetic, as is slow motion film of explosions or falls, because something in this, before being completed, has time to pass you by, which, if such a thing exists, constitutes the perfection of desire. 9 The only good strip is the one that reflects the body in the mirror of gestures and follows this rigorous narcissistic abstraction: the gestural rep- ertoire being the mobile equivalent of the panoply of signs and marks at work in situations such as erectile stagings of the body at every level of fashion, make-up and advertising. 10 The bad strip is obviously a pure undressing, which simply restores a state of nudity, the alleged finality of the spectacle, lacking any hypnosis of the body, in order to give it directly over to the audience’s lusts. It is not that the bad strip is unable to capture the audience’s desire – on the contrary – but because the girl was unable to recreate her body as an object for herself, because she was unable to effect this transubstantiation of profane (realist, naturalist) nudity into sacred nudity, where a body describes its own contours, feels itself (but always across a kind of subtle void, a sensual distance, of a circumlocution which, once again, as in the dream, reflects the fact that gestures are like a mirror, that the body is turned back on itself by this mirror of gestures). The bad strip is threatened by nudity or immobility (or the absence of ‘rhythm’, the awkward gesture): all that remains on the stage is a woman and an ‘obscene’ (in the strict sense of the term) body, rather than the closed sphere of a body which, by means of this aura of gestures, design(ate)s itself as a phallus and specifies itself as a sign of desire. To succeed is not at all to ‘make love with the audience’ as is generally thought, it is rather pre- cisely the opposite. The stripper is a goddess according to Bernardin, and the prohibition cast over her, which she traces around herself, does not signify that you cannot take anything from her (cannot pass into sexual acting-out, this repressive situation belongs to the bad strip), but rather that you cannot give her anything, because she gives herself everything, hence the complete transcendence that makes her fascinating. Symbolic Exchange and Death130 The slow pace of the gestures comes from the priesthood and from tran- substantiation. Not bread and wine in this case, but the transubstantiation of the body into the phallus. Every piece of clothing that falls brings her no closer to nudity, to the naked ‘truth’ of sex (although the entire spectacle is also fuelled by the voyeuristic drive, haunted by a violent laying bare and the rape-drive, but these phantasms run counter to the spectacle). As her clothes fall, she design(ate)s what she strips down as a phallus – she unveils herself-as-other and the same game becomes profound, the body emerging more and more as a phallic effigy to the rhythm of the strip. This is not then a game of stripping signs away in order to reveal a sexual ‘depth’, but, on the contrary, an ascending play of the construction of signs – each mark deriving an erotic force by means of its labour as a sign, that is, by means of the reversal it effects of what has never been (loss and castration) into what it design(ate)s instead to take its place: the phallus. 11 This is why the strip- tease is slow: it ought to go as fast as possible if it is simply a matter of preparing for sex. It is slow because it is discourse, the construction of signs, the meticulous elaboration of deferred meaning. The gaze too testifies to this phallic transfiguration. A fixed gaze is an essential asset of the good stripper. This is commonly interpreted as a distantiation technique, a cool- ness intended to mark the limits of this erotic situation. Yes and no: the fixed gaze that merely marks a prohibition would once more turn the strip into a kind of repressive pornodrama. That is not a good strip, the mastery of the gaze has nothing to do with a willed ‘cool’: if it is cool, as with man- nequins, it is on condition that cool is redefined as a very specific quality of the whole contemporary media and body culture, and no longer belongs to the order of the hot and the cold. This gaze is the neutralised gaze of auto- erotic fascination, of the woman-object gazing at herself with her eyes wide open, then closing her eyes on herself. This is not the effect of desire under- going censorship, it is the peak of perfection and perversion. It is the fulfilment of the entire sexual system that has it that a woman is never more completely herself, and therefore never so seductive, as when she accepts giving herself pleasure first of all, taking pleasure in herself, having no other desire or transcendence than that of her own image. The ideal body, as outlined in this statute, is that of the mannequin. The mannequin offers the model of every phallic instrumentalisation of the body. The word itself states this: manne-ken, ‘little man’, the child or the penis. The woman wraps her own body in a sophisticated manipulation, a flawless and intense narcissistic discipline, which effectively makes it the paradigm of seduction. And doubtless it is here, in this perverse process that turns her and her sacralised body into a living phallus, that we find the real castration of woman (also of man, but according to a model which tends to crystallise around the woman). To be castrated is to be covered with phallic substitutes. The woman is covered in them, she is summoned to produce a phallus from her body, on pain of perhaps not being desirable. And if women are not fetishists it is because they perform this labour of continual fetishisation on themselves, they become dolls. We know that the doll is a 131 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs fetish produced in order to be continually dressed and undressed, dressed up and dressed down. It is this play of covering and uncovering that gives the doll its childhood symbolic value, it is in this play, conversely, that every object- and symbolic relation regresses when the woman turns herself into a doll, becomes her own fetish and the fetish of the other.12 As Freud says: ‘pieces of underclothing, which are so often chosen as a fetish, crystallise the last moment of undressing, the last moment in which the woman could still be regarded as phallic (‘Fetishism’, in Standard Edition, Vol. 21, p. 155). Thus the fascination of the strip-tease as a spectacle of castration derives from the immanence of discovering, or rather seeking and never managing to discover, or better still searching by all available means without ever discovering, that there is nothing there. ‘An aversion, which is never absent in any fetishist, to the real female genitals remains a stigma indelibile of the repression that has taken place’ (ibid., p. 154). The experience of this unthinkable absence, which subsequently remains constitutive of every ‘revelation’, every ‘unveiling’ (and in particular the sexual status of ‘truth’), the obsession with the hole is changed into the converse fascination with the phallus. From this mystery of the denied, barred, gaping void, a whole population of fetishes surges forth (objects, phantasms, body-objects). The fetishised woman’s body itself comes to bar the point of absence from which it arose, it comes to bar this vertigo in all its erotic presence, a ‘token of a triumph over the threat of castration and a protection against it’ (ibid., p. 154). There is nothing behind this succession of veils, there never has been, and the impulse which is always pressing forward in order to discover this is strictly speaking the process of castration; not the recognition of lack, but the fascinating vertigo of this nihilating substance. The entire march of the West, ending in a vertiginous compulsion for realism, is affected by this myopia of castration. Pretending to restore the ‘ground of things’, we unconsciously ‘eye up’ the void. Instead of a recognition of castration, we establish all kinds of phallic alibis; then, following a fascinated compulsion, we seek to dismiss these alibis one by one in order to uncover the ‘truth’, which is always castration, but which is in the last instance always revealed to be castration denied. Planned Narcissism All this leads us to repeat the question of narcissism in terms of social con- trol. There is a passage in Freud that brings out everything we have been discussing up to this point: Women, especially if they grow up with good looks, develop a certain self-contentment which compensates them for the social restrictions that are imposed on them in their choice of object. Strictly speaking, it is only them- selves that such women love with an intensity comparable to that of the man’s love for them. Nor does their need lie in the direction of loving, but of being loved; and the man who fulfils this condition is the one who finds Symbolic Exchange and Death132 favour with them. … Such women have the greatest fascination for men, not only for aesthetic reasons, since as a rule they are the most beautiful, but also because of a combination of interesting psychological factors. (‘On narcissism: An introduction’, in Standard Edition, Vol. 14, 1957, pp. 88–9) There follows a question ‘of children, cats, and certain animals’ which ‘we env[y] … for maintaining … an unassailable libidinal position’, and for the ‘narcissistic consistency … they manage’ (ibid., p. 89). In the cur- rent system of erotics, however, it is not a question of primary narcissism bound to a sort of ‘polymorphous perversity’. It is rather a matter of the displacement of ‘[the narcissism] enjoyed in childhood by the actual ego [onto] the ego-ideal’, or, more precisely, the projection of the ‘narcissistic perfection of … childhood’ (ibid., p. 94) as the ideal ego which, as we know, is bound up with repression and sublimation. The gratification the woman takes from her body and the rhetoric of beauty reflect, in fact, a fierce discipline, an ethics which parallels the one that governs the eco- nomic order. Neither can one distinguish, in the framework of this func- tional aesthetics of the body, the process by which the subject submits to its narcissistic ideal ego from that by which society enjoins the subject to conform to this ideal, leaving it no other alternative but to love itself, to invent itself and invest itself in accordance with socially imposed rules. This narcissism is therefore radically distinct from that of the cat or the child in that it is placed under the sign of value. This is a planned narcissism, a managed and functional exaltation of beauty as the exploitation and exchange of signs. Self-seduction is only apparently gratuitous; in fact its every detail is finalised by the norm of the optimal management of the body on the market of signs. Modern erotics, whatever phantasms are in play in it, is organised around a rational economy of value, differentiating it absolutely from primary or infantile narcissism. Thus fashion and advertising sketch the auto-erotic Carte du Tendre13 and plan its exploration: you are responsible for your body and must invest in it and make it yield benefits – not in accordance with the order of enjoyment – but with the signs reflected and mediated by mass models, and in accordance with an organisation chart of prestige, etc. A strange strategy is operative here; there is a diversion and transfer of investments from the body and the erogenous zones towards staging the body and ero- togeneity. From now on, narcissistic seduction becomes associated with the body or with parts of the body objectified by a technique, by objects, gestures and a play of marks and signs. This neo-narcissism is associated with the manipulation of the body as value. This is a planned economy of the body based on a schema of libidinal and symbolic destructuration, an administered dismantling and restructuration of investments, a ‘reappro- priation’ of the body according to models of management and hence under the control of meaning, transferring the fulfilment of desire onto the code. 14 All this is established as a ‘synthetic’ narcissism which must be distinguished from the two classical forms of narcissism: 133 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs 1. Primary, fusional narcissism. 2. Secondary narcissism: the investment of the body as distinct, the mirror of the ego. Integration of the ego by specular recognition and the gaze of the other. 3. Tertiary, ‘synthetic’, narcissism: rewriting the body, deconstructed as a ‘personalised’ Eros, that is, indexed on collective functional models. The homogenised body as the site of the industrial production of signs and differences, mobilised under the sign of programmatic seduction. The interception of ambivalence in the interests of a total positivisation of the body as the schema of seduction, satisfaction and prestige. The body as a summation of partial objects, the subject of which is the second person plural of consumption.15 The interception of the subject’s relation to its proper lack in its body, by the body which has itself become the medium of totalisation. This was made admirably apparent in the film Le Mépris, with Brigitte Bardot, examining her own body in a mirror, offering each part of it to the erotic approval of the other, the finished product being a formal addition as object: ‘So, d’you love every bit of me?’ The body becomes a total system of signs arranged by models under the general equivalent of the phallic cult, just as capital becomes the total system of exchange-value under the general equivalent of money. Incestuous Manipulation The current ‘liberation’ of the body necessarily undergoes this narcissism. The ‘liberated’ body is a body where law and prohibition, which once used to censor sex and the body from the outside, are somehow interiorised as a narcissistic variable. External constraints have changed into the constituency of the sign, a closed simulation. And if, in the Name-of-the-Father, the puritan law was initially and in a violent manner brought to bear on genital sexuality, the current phase corresponds to a mutation of all these characteristics: 1. It is no longer a violent repression, it has been pacified. 2. It is no longer fundamentally oriented towards genital sexuality, but is subsequently sanctioned by morality. This infinitely more subtle and rad- ical stage of repression and control is oriented towards the level of symbolic exchange itself. That is to say, that repression, overcoming secondary sexu- ation (genitality and the social bisexual model) reaches primary sexuation (erogenous difference and ambivalence, the subject’s relation to his own lack on which the virtuality of all symbolic exchange is based).16 3. It no longer takes place in the Name-of-the-Father, but in some way in the Name-of-the-Mother. Because symbolic exchange is based on incest pro- hibition, every abolition (censorship, repression, destructuration) at this level of symbolic exchange signifies a process of incestuous regression. We have seen that the eroticisation of the phallic manipulation of the body is characterised as fetishisation: now, fetishistic perversion is defined by the Symbolic Exchange and Death134 fact that it has never gotten over the desire for the mother, making the fetish the replacement for what the fetishist lacked. All the labour of the perverse subject consists in settling into the mirage of himself as the living phallus of the mother so as to find a fulfilment of desire there: this is in fact the fulfilment of the desire for the mother (whereas tradi- tional genital repression signifies the fulfilment of the word of the Father). We can see that this creates a strictly incestuous situation: the subject is no longer divided (he no longer abandons his phallic identity) and no longer divides (he no longer relinquishes any part of himself in a rela- tion of symbolic exchange). This is fully defined by identification with the mother’s phallus. Exactly the same process as in incest, where it never leaves the family. Today, generally speaking, the same goes for the body: if the law of the Father or puritan morality has been (relatively speaking) avoided here, it is according to a libidinal economy characterised by the destructuration of the symbolic and the raising of the incest barrier. This general model of the fulfilment of desire, circulated by the mass-media, always comes with an obsessional and anxious quality that is utterly different from the basically hysterical puritan neurosis. It is no longer a matter of an anxiety bound up with Oedipal prohibition, but of an anxiety bound up with the fact, even at the breast of satisfaction and multiplied phallic enjoyment, in the ‘heart’ 17 of the gratifying, tolerant, soothing, permissive society, of being only the living marionette of the desire for the mother. A deeper anxiety than that of geni- tal frustration, since it entails the abolition of the symbolic and of exchange, as well as the incestuous position where the subject comes to lack even his own lack. This anxiety is translated into and betrayed everywhere today as the phobic obsession with manipulation. We are all, at every level, living with this subtle form of repression and alienation: its sources are elusive, its presence insidious and total, and the forms that a struggle might take remain undiscovered and perhaps cannot be found. This is because manipulation refers to the original manipulation of the subject by the mother as much as by his own phallus. We can no longer stand against this fusional and manipulatory plenitude, this dispos- session, as we could against the transcendental law of the Father. Every future revolution must take account of this fundamental condition and, between the law of the Father and the desire for the mother, between the ‘cycle’ of repression and transgression and the cycle of regression and manipulation, rediscover the form of the articulation of the symbolic.18 Models of the Body 1. For medicine, the body of reference is the corpse. In other words, the corpse is the ideal limit of the body in its relation to the system of medicine. The accomplished practice of the corpse produces and repro- duces medicine under the sign of the preservation of life. 135 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs 2. For religion, the ideal reference of the body is the animal (instincts and appetites of the ‘flesh’). The corpse as a mass grave, and its reincarna- tion beyond death as a carnal metaphor. 3. For the system of political economy, the ideal type of the body is the robot. The robot is the accomplished model of the functional ‘liberation’ of the body as labour power, it is the extrapolation of absolute, asexual, rational productivity (this may be a cerebral robot: the computer is always the extrapolation of the brain and labour power). 4. For the system of the political economy of the sign, the reference model of the body is the mannequin (along with all its variations). Contemporary with the robot (this is the ideal pair of science fiction: Barbarella), the mannequin also represents a totally functionalised body under the law of value, but this time as the site of the production of the value-sign. It is no longer labour power, but models of signification that are produced – not only sexual models of fulfilment, but sexuality itself as a model. Behind the ideality of its ends (health, resurrection, rational productiv- ity, liberated sexuality), every system thus alternately reveals the reductive phantasm on which it is articulated, and the delirious vision of the body that provides its strategy. Corpse, animal, machine and mannequin – these are the negative ideal types of the body, the fantastic reductions under which it is produced and written into successive systems. The strange thing is that the body is nothing other than the models in which different systems have enclosed it, and at the same time every other thing: their radical alternative, the irreducible difference that denies them. We may still call the body this inverse virtuality. For this however – for the body as material of symbolic exchange – there is no model, no code, no ideal type, no controlling phantasm, since there could not be a system of the body as anti-object. Phallus Exchange Standard Since the Industrial Revolution, a single immense mutation has enveloped material goods, language and sexuality (the body), in accordance with a process that marks either the progressive generalisation of political econ- omy, or the entrenchment of the law of value. 1. Products become commodities: use-value and exchange-value. Intended on the one hand for the abstract finality of the ‘needs’ that they ‘satisfy’, and on the other hand to the structural form that governs their produc- tion and exchange. 2. Language becomes a means of communication, a field of signification. It is arranged into signifiers and signifieds. Just like the separation of the commodity into a referential finality, language as a medium has the goal of expression, and is separated into the order of signifieds and a structural form that governs the exchange of signifiers: the code of langue. Symbolic Exchange and Death136 In both cases, the passage to a functional finality, the rational assignation of an ‘objective’ content (use-value or signified-referent), seals the assig- nation of a structural form that is the form of political economy itself. In the ‘neo-capitalist’ (techno- and semiocratic) framework, this form is sys- tematised at the expense of ‘objective’ reference: signifieds and use-values progressively disappear to the great advantage of the operation of the code and exchange-value. At the term of this process, a term which today remains only an outline for us, the two ‘sectors’ of production and signification are merging. Products and commodities are produced as signs and messages and are reg- ulated on the basis of the abstract configuration of language: transporting contents, values, finalities (their signifieds), they circulate according to an abstract general form organised by models. Commodities and messages both culminate in the same sign-status. Thereby, moreover, their reference is blurred in the face of the play of signifiers which can also in this way attain structural perfection. With the acceleration and proliferation of messages, information, signs and models, it is in fashion as a total cycle that the linear world of the commodity will reach completion. The body and sexuality can be analysed in terms of everything that pre- ceded it (use-value and exchange-value; signifier and signified). 1. We can show how sexuality is reduced, in its current mode of ‘liberation’, to use-value (the satisfaction of ‘sexual needs’) and exchange-value (the play and calculation of the erotic signs governed by the circulation of models). We can also show that sexuality becomes separated as a function: from the collective function of the reproduction of the spe- cies, it passes to the individual functions of physiological equilibrium (part of a general hygiene), mental equilibrium, ‘self-expression’ or the expression of subjectivity, unconscious emanations, the ethics of sexual pleasure (what else?). In any case, sexuality becomes an element of the economy of the subject, an objective finality of the subject itself obedient to an order of finalities (whatever they might be). 2. The more it is functionalised (the more it submits to some transcend- ent reference that speaks through it, even if it were its own idealised principle, the libido, the signified’s last subterfuge), the more sexuality takes on a structural form (like the products of industry or the language of communication). It reverts to the great oppositions (male/female) in whose disjunctions it is imprisoned, and crystallises around the exercise of a particular sexual model, attested to by a particular sexual organ, and closes the play of the body’s signifiers. 3. The Male/Female structure becomes confused with the privilege granted to the genital function (whether reproductive or erotic). The privilege of genitality over all the body’s erogenous virtualities reverberates in the structure of a male dominated social order, for structure hinges on bio- logical difference. This is not merely in order to maintain a genuine difference, but, on the contrary, to establish a general equivalence, the 137 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs Phallus becoming the absolute signifier around which all erogenous possibilities come to be measured, arranged, abstracted, and become equivalent. The Phallus exchange standard governs contemporary sexu- ality in its entirety, including its ‘revolution’. 4. The emergence of the phallus as the general equivalent of sexuality, combined with the emergence of sexuality itself as the general equiva- lent of the virtualities of symbolic exchange, delineates the emergence of a political economy of the body which is established on the ruins of the body’s symbolic economy. In the context of a general liberalisation, revelling in the current sexual ‘revolution’ is only the expression of the accession of the body and sexuality to the stage of political economy, a sign of their integration with the law of value and general equivalence. 5. From both angles – the promotion of sexuality as function or the pro- motion of sexuality as structural discourse – the subject turns out to be back with the fundamental norm of political economy: it thinks itself and locates itself sexually in terms of equilibrium (an equilibrium of functions under the sign of the identity of the ego) and coherence (the structural coherence of a discourse under the sign of the infinite repro- duction of the code). Just as ‘design(at)ed’ objects – seized by the political economy of the sign – obey an imperative of deprivation that reflects an ascetic economy of calculated functions; just as the sign in general has a functional tendency to divest itself in order to translate, as closely as possible, the adequation (of the signifier and the signified) which is its law and its reality principle, so the body seized by political economy also tends towards a formal nudity as if towards its absolute imperative. This nudity embodies all the labour of inscription and marks, fashion and make-up at the same time as the whole idealist perspective of ‘liberation’ makes no ‘discoveries’ or ‘rediscoveries’ concerning the body: it translates the logical metamorphosis of the body in the historical process of our societies. It translates the modern status of the body in its relation to political economy. Just as the divestment of objects characterises their assignation to a function, that is to say, their neutralisation by the function, so the body’s nudity defines its assignation to the sex/func- tion, its assignment to sex as function, that is to say, the reciprocal neutralisa- tion of the body and sex. Demagogy of the Body Under the sign of the sexual revolution, the transfiguration of the pulsion as revolutionary substance and the unconscious as the subject of history. Liberating the primary processes as the ‘poetic’ principle of social reality, liberating the unconscious as use-value, such is the imaginary that crystallises under the slogan of the body. Sex and the body are able to bear all these hopes because, repressed under whatever order used to cover our ‘historic’ Symbolic Exchange and Death138 societies, they have become metaphors of radical negativity. They want to make these metaphors pass into the state of a revolutionary fact. Error: to take the side of the body is a trap. We cannot take the side of the primary processes, this remains a secondary illusion.19 At best, the body will remain, theoretically too, eternally ambivalent: object and anti-object – cutting across and annulling the disciplines that claim to unify it; site and non-site – the site of the unconscious as the non- site of the subject, and so on. Even after the partition of the body into the anatomical and the erogenous, contemporary psychoanalysis (Leclaire) continues to set down the movement of desire in its name, under the regime of the letter. Always the body, since there are no words to express the non-site: the best is doubtless still that which, throughout a long history, has designated what has no, or does not take, place: the repressed. We must, however, be aware of the risks this inherited word involves. The subversive privilege the body was given since it was always in a state of repression is now coming to an end in the process of its emancipation20 (not entirely due to the actions of a repressive politics of desublimation; psychoanalysis too plays its part in the officialisation of sex and the body: here again we find an inextricable confusion between sex and the body as the crucial event of the subject, as process, labour, and also as an historical advent in the order of concepts and values). We must ask ourselves if this body we are ‘liberating’ does not forever denegate the symbolic potentialities of the old repressed body, if the body ‘everybody’s talking about’ is not precisely the converse of the speaking body. In the current system, the body as the site of the primary processes is contrasted to the body as secondary process: erotic use- and exchange-value, a rationalisation under the sign of value. The pulsional body menaced by desire is contrasted to the semiurgic, structural body, theatricised in nudity, functionalised by operational sexuality. The secondary body of sexual emancipation and ‘repressive desublima- tion’ is set under the sign of Eros alone. There is a confusion with sex and the mere principle of Eros, that is to say, a neutralisation of one by the other with the ex-inscription of the death-drive. The pleasure principle is thus established as the rationality of a ‘liberated’ subjectivity, a ‘new political economy’ of the subject. ‘Eros redefines reason in his own terms. Reasonable is what sustains the order of gratification’ (Herbert Marcuse, Eros and Civilisation [London: Sphere, 1970], p. 180). From now on, ‘liberated’ subjectivity is exhausted in inscribing itself as positivity in the exercise of Eros, the pleasure principle, which is simply the reification of the libido as the model of fulfilment. There is a new reason here, opening the way to an unlimited finality of the subject, and so there is no longer any difference between sexual ‘escalation’ and the schema of indefinite societal growth, of the ‘liberation’ of the forces of pro- duction; both evolve according to the same movement, both equally destined for failure in accordance with the irrevocable reflux of a death drive they thought they could conjure away. The body organised under the sign of Eros represents a more advanced phase of political economy. Here the reabsorption of symbolic exchange is 139 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs as radical as the alienation of human labour in the classical system of polit- ical economy. If Marx has described the historical phase where the alienation of labour power and the logic of the commodity necessarily resulted in a reification of consciousness, today we could say that the inscrip- tion of the body (and of all symbolic domains) into the logic of the sign is necessarily doubled by a reification of the unconscious. Instead of being cut through by desire, nudity operates as the equiva- lent to and staging of desire. Instead of sex cutting through the body, it operates as the signifier and the equivalent of sex. Instead of ambivalence dividing sexuality, it operates throughout the structural combination of the ‘male’ and the ‘female’ as the equivalent of this ambivalence! The sexual duopoly operates as the scenario of difference. The libido is struc- turally divided into two terms and operates as the reductive equivalent of the death drive. In this way nudity, sex, the unconscious, etc., instead of opening up a more profound difference, are linked metonymically to one another as a constellation of representative equivalents in order to define, term by term, a discourse of sex as value. This is the same operation as in psycho-metaphysics, where the subject, as ideal referent, is nothing in fact but circulation, a metonymic exchange interrupted by terms of conscious- ness, will, representation, etc. Apologue − So ultimately, why are there two sexes? − What are you complaining about? Do you want twelve of them or just one? A modern novel The margin could be wider: why not zero or an infinity of sexes? The ques- tion of the ‘total’ is absurd here (whereas we can logically ask ‘why not six fingers on each hand?’). It is absurd because sexualisation is precisely the partition that cuts across every subject, making the ‘one’ or ‘several’ unthinkable. The ‘two’ also becomes unthinkable, however, since the ‘two’ is already a total (besides, the above dialogue operates on the figure of the ‘two’). Now sex, understood radically, cannot accede to the stage of the sum total nor to a calculable status: it is a difference, and the two ‘sides’ of difference, which are not terms, cannot be added together nor become parts of a series. They cannot be calculated on the basis of units. By contrast, the dialogue is logical in the context of the imposed bisexual model (Male/Female) since from the outset it sets sex up as two structur- ally opposed terms. The possibility of an absurd passage to the limit of serial numeration, to sex as accumulation, is implied by the bisexual structure from the moment male and female are set up as whole terms. In this way the ambivalence of sex is reduced by bivalence (the two poles and their sexual roles). Today, when bivalence is undergoing the Symbolic Exchange and Death140 metamorphoses of the ‘sexual revolution’, and where we see, as they say, a blurring of the differences between the male and the female, the ambiv- alence of sex is reduced by the ambiguity of the unisex. Against the metaphor of the sex principle. Today, our way lit by Freud, we know very well, too well, how to discern the sublimation and secondary rationalisation of the pulsional processes behind any given social practice, ethics or politics. It has become a cultural cliché to decode every discourse in terms of repression and phantasmatic determination. This is only right, however: they are now only terms, and the unconscious is merely a language to which to refer. Sexual discourse too becomes entirely phantasmatic when sex itself, the critical reduction of moral and social mystification that it used to be, becomes the mode of rationalisation of a problem situated at the level of the total symbolic destruction of social relations, an examination the sexualist discourse contributes to locking away under a security code. It is easy today to read in the Sunday papers that frigidity in so many women is due to their overbearing fixation on the father, and that they punish themselves for this by prohibiting pleasure: this psychoanalytic ‘truth’ now becomes a part of culture and social rationalisa- tion (hence the ever increasing impasse in the analytic cure). The sexual or analytic interpretation has no privilege. It too can become the phantasm of the definitive truth, and immediately therefore can also become the revolutionary theme. This is what is happening today – the collusion between the revolution and psychoanalysis results from the same imaginary and the same distortion as the ‘bourgeois’ recuperation of psy- choanalysis; both result from the inscription of sex and the unconscious as the determining agency, that is to say, their reduction to a rationalist causality. There is mystification from the moment there is a rationalisation in the name of some agency or other, as soon as the sexual is sublimated and rationalised into the political, the social and the moral, but equally as soon as the symbolic is censored and sublimated into a dominant sexual parole. Zhuang-Zi’s Butcher ‘Hey!’ Prince When-Hui said to him, ‘how can your art reach such a level?’ The butcher put his knife down and said, ‘I love the Tao and so I progress in my art. At the start of my career, I saw only the ox. After three years’ experi- ence, I no longer saw the ox. Now my mind works more than my eyes do. My senses no longer act, only my mind. I knew the natural conformation of the ox and only attacked it at the interstices. If I do not damage the arteries, veins, muscles and nerves, then I shouldn’t damage the major bones! A good butcher uses one knife in a year since he cuts only flesh. An ordinary butcher uses one knife in a month since he shatters bones with it. I have used the same knife for nineteen years. It has carved up many thousands of oxen and its cutting edge seems as if it has been newly sharpened. Strictly speaking, the joints of the bones have gaps in them and the cutting edge of the knife has no width. Whoever knows how to drive the extremely fine blade into the gaps 141 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs manages his knife with ease because it is working in empty spaces. That is why I have used my knife for nineteen years and its cutting edge always appears newly sharpened. Every time I have cut the joints of the bones, I notice par- ticular difficulties to be solved and I hold my breath, fix my gaze and work slowly. I wield my knife very gently and the joints separate as easily as we disturb the earth on the ground. I am taking up my knife again and getting back to work.’ (Zhuang-Zi, The Principle of Hygiene III) A perfect example of analysis and its prodigious operationality when it exceeds the full, substantial and opaque vision of the object (‘at the start … I saw only the ox’), the anatomical vision of the body as a full edifice of bone, flesh and organs, unified by external representations, that can be carved up at will. This is the body on which the ordinary butcher labours, cutting by brute force, getting as far as to be able to recognise the articulation of the void and the structure of the void where the body is articulated (‘[I] only attacked it at the interstices’). Zhuang-Zi’s butcherknife is not a mass passing though a mass, it is itself the void (‘with ease because it is working in empty spaces’). The knife that works in line with the analytic mind does not therefore work in spaces filled by oxen to which the senses and the eyes attest, but in accor- dance with the internal logical organisation of the rhythm and the intervals. If it does not wear out, it is because it does not set out to conquer a substance of the density of flesh and bone – because it is pure difference operating on difference – in order to disassemble a body (a practical operation) which, as we can clearly see, rests on a symbolic economy which is neither ‘objective’ knowledge nor a relation of forces, but a structure of exchange: the knife and the body are exchanged, the knife articulates the body’s lack and thereby deconstructs it in accordance with its own rhythm. This knife is also Leclaire’s letter. The latter comes to divide a particu- lar site on the body erotogenically in accordance with the logic of desire. A receptive, hard wearing and ‘useless’ [inusable] symbolic inscription, when the letter, due to its extremely fine thread, disjoins the anatomical body and works in the void articulated by the body. This instead of the poor butcher’s full discourse that merely cuts anatomically and according to material evidence. The millenial brother of Lichtenberg’s knife, 21 the logical paradox of which (the knife with no blade which is missing a handle) sets up the sym- bolic configuration of an absent phallus instead of the full phallus and its f(ph)antas(ma)tic evidence. This knife does not work on the body, it resolves it, circling it attentively and dreamily (free-floating attention: ‘I hold my breath, fix my gaze and work slowly’), proceeding anagrammati- cally, that is to say, it does not advance from one term to another, from one organ, juxtaposed and connected to another like words by the thread of a functional syntax: this is how the bad butcher and the linguist of significa- tion proceed. Here, the thread of meaning is quite different: it splits the manifest body and follows the body beneath the body, like the anagram which follows the model of the dispersal and resolution of a first term or corpus whose secret is another articulation than that which runs beneath Symbolic Exchange and Death142 discourse and traces something (a name, a formula) whose absence haunts the text. It is this formula of the body which defies the anatomical body, that the knife describes and resolves. It is certain that the efficacy of the sign, its symbolic efficacy in primitive societies, far from being ‘magical’, is bound up with this extremely precise labour of anagrammatical resolution. Hence the architecture of the erogenous body, which is only ever the ana- grammatic articulation of a formula ‘lost without ever having been’, a formula whose thread of desire reforms the disjunctive synthesis that it retraces without saying: desire itself is nothing other than the resolution of the signifier in the orphic dispersal of the body, in the anagrammatical dis- persal of the poem, according to the musical rhythm of the knife of Zhuang-Zi’s butcher. Notes 1. The genitals themselves, the object-sex, are never fetishised, only the phallus as the gen- eral equivalent; just as in political economy, the product or the commodity in itself is never fetishised, but rather the form of exchange-value and its general equivalent. 2. There is an affinity between the ceremonial of signs surrounding the erotic body and the ceremonial of suffering that surrounds sado-masochistic perversion. The marks of ‘fetishism’ (necklaces, bracelets, chains) always mimic and evoke the marks of sado-masochism (mutilation, wounds, cuts). These two perversions electively crystallise around this system of marks. Certain marks (and only these are suggestive) render the body more nude than if it were really nude. Here the body’s nudity is the perverse nudity associated with the cere- monial. These marks may be clothes or accessories, but also gestures, music or technique. All perversions need effects in the widest sense of the term. In sado-masochism suffering becomes the emblem of the body, just as jewels or rouge may in fetishist passion. All perversions revel in something: in the erotic system we are describing, the body revels in indulgence, self-seduction; in sado-masochism, it revels in suffering (painful auto-eroticism). There is, however, an affinity between the two, since whether the other suffers or indulges in himself, he is radically objectified. Every perversion acts out death. 3. The sexual act is often only possible at the cost of this perversion: the other’s body is phantasised as a mannequin, a phallus-mannequin, a phallic fetish, cherished, caressed and possessed as the phantasiser’s own penis. 4. Against the thesis of the phallic mother who terrifies because she is phallic, Freud said that the paralysis produced by the Medusa’s head worked because the snakes that replaced her hair came, as many times as there were snakes, to deny castration. Whoever wished to annul castration was repeatedly reminded of it through this reversal (A. Green). The same goes for the fascination with make-up and the strip-tease: each fragment of the body highlighted or phallically enhanced by the mark also happens to deny castration, which nevertheless re-emerges everywhere in the very separation of these part-objects so that, like the fetish-object, they only ever appear to ‘testify to and veil the castrated genitals’ (Lacan). 5. If the line of the stocking is more erotic than the shawl covering the eye or the line of the glove on the arm, it is not due to the promiscuity of the genitals: it is simply because castration is played out and denied here at close range, as near as possible and in the great- est possible immanence. Thus in Freud it is the last perceived object, the closest to the discovery of the absence of the penis in women that will become the fetish-object. 6. Only the annulment of phallus-value and the irruption of the radical play of difference remain unthinkable and inadmissible. 143 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs 7. That said, the fact that one of the terms of sexual binomialism, the male, although it has become the marked term and although this in turn has become the general equivalent in the system, this structure which to us appears ineluctable is in fact without biological foundation: like every great structure, its goal is precisely to break with nature (Lévi- Strauss). We can imagine a culture where the terms are reversed: a male strip-tease in a matriarchal culture. All that is required is that the female become the marked term and operate as the general equivalent. We must see, however, that even if these terms are alter- nated (which largely encapsulates women’s ‘liberation’), the structure remains unchanged as does the refusal of castration and phallic abstraction. So we can see that the real prob- lem is not whether the system carries within it any possibility for structural alteration, but rather lies in a radical alternative, which puts into question the very abstraction of this political economy of sex, based on making one of the terms a general equivalent and on the misrecognition [méconnaissance] of castration and the symbolic economy. 8. Except for the noble excretion of tears, but with incredible precautions! Cf this admi- rable text for a cosmetics firm called Longcil; ‘when an emotion overwhelms you to the point that only looks can translate its depth, at this moment more than any other, you don’t want your eye-shadow to betray you. At this moment more than any other, Longcil is irreplaceable … especially in moments like these, it takes care of your looks to protect and improve them … so that now you need only put on your make-up and not give it a second thought.’ 9. The gestural narrative, or, technically speaking, the ‘bump and grind’, realises here what Bataille called the ‘ruse of opposition’ [feinte du contraire]: because it is continuously cov- ered and concealed by the same gestures that denude it, the body here acquires its poetic meaning by force of ambivalence. On the other hand, we see how naïve nudists and others are, their ‘superficial beach nudity’ that Bernardin speaks of, who believe they are laying reality entirely bare and fall into the equivalence of the sign: reality is nothing more than the equivalent signifier to a natural signified. This naturalist unveiling is only ever a ‘mental act’, as Bernardin put it so well, it is an ideology. In this sense the strip, through its perverse play and its sophisticated ambivalence, is as opposed to ‘liberation through nudity’ as it is to a liberal-rationalist ideology. The ‘escalation of the nude’ is the escalation of rationalism, the rights of man, formal liberation, liberal demagogy, and petty-bourgeois free-thinking. This realistic aberration was put perfectly back into its place by a little girl’s words when she was offered a doll that pisses: ‘My little sister can do that too. Couldn’t you give me a real one?’ 10. A play of transparent veils can play the same role as this play of gestures. Advertising is of the same order when it frequently puts two or several women on stage. It is only in appearance that this is a homosexual thematic, since it is in fact a variant of the narcissis- tic model of self-seduction, a play of reduplications centred on the self by means of the detour of a sexual simulation (which may be homosexual besides: there are only ever men in advertising to act as a narcissistic warning, to help the woman to take pleasure in herself). 11. Even when the last piece of clothing falls away, the integral strip does not alter its logic. We know that gestures are enough to trace an enchanted line around the body, a much more subtle marker than panties. In any case, it is not a sexual organ that this structural marker (panties or gesture) bars, but the very sexualisation that crosses the body: the spectacle of the organ and, at the limit, of the orgasm do not therefore eliminate this at all. 12. The perverse desire is the normal desire imposed by the social model. If the woman avoids auto-erotic regression, she is no longer an object of desire, she becomes a subject of desire, and thereby resistant to the structure of the perverse desire. But she too could very well seek to fulfil her desire in the fetishistic neutralisation of the desire of the other, so that the perverse structure (that kind of division of the labour of desire between the subject and the object which is the secret of perversion and its erotic yield) remains unchanged. The only alternative is that everyone should break down this phallic fortress and open up the perverse structure which surrounds the sexual system; instead of fixing their eyes on Symbolic Exchange and Death144 a phallic identity, on its absence in the place of the other, leave the white magic of phallic identification in order to recognise their own perilous ambivalence, so that the play of desire as symbolic exchange becomes possible once more. 13. [In the seventeenth century a certain Mlle de Scudéry imagined a map [carte] of the country or kingdom she conceived and called Tendre, following the contempo- rary usage of the word tendre to designate the ‘tender emotions’ and sentiments, as opposed to the ‘military virtues’ of strength, toughness, coldness and cruelty, etc. (Le Petit Robert). – tr.] 14. If we refer to the function of the letter in Leclaire’s work, an erotic function of differ- ential inscription and the annulment of difference, we can see that the current system is characterised by the abolition of the opening function of the letter and by augmenting its closure property. The literal function has broken with the alphabet of desire (symbolic inscription disappeared to the great advantage of structural inscription) in favour of the alphabet of the code. Even in analysis, the ambivalence of the letter has been replaced by an equivalence within the system of the code, its literal function as (linguistic) value. The letter is then reduplicated and reflects itself like a full sign, it is fetishistically invested as a single line instead and in place of erogenous difference. The letter is invested as a phallus in which all differences are eliminated. The scansion of the subject by the letter in enjoyment is eliminated in favour of the fulfilment of desire in the fetishised letter alone. Thus not only the anatomical body is opposed to Leclaire’s erogenous body, but also and especially the semiurgic body, made up of a lexis of full, coded signifiers, signifying models of the fulfilment of desire. 15. The subject of consumption, in particular the consumption of the body, is neither the ego, nor the unconscious subject, it is the second person plural, the ‘you’ of advertising, i.e. the intercepted, fragmented subject reconstituted by the dominant models, ‘personalised’ and brought into play in the sign-exchange. Being no more than the simulation model of the second person of exchange, the ‘you’ is effectively no-one, only a fictive term maintained by the discourse of the model. This ‘you’ is no longer the one that speaks, but the effect of the division of the code, a phantom that appeared in the mirror of signs. 16. We really must appreciate that the ‘liberation’ and ‘revolution’ of the body works essen- tially at the level of secondary sexualisation, i.e. a bisexual rationalisation of sex. They are therefore operative in a late phase, where a puritan repression used to be, while at the same time they are caught at the level of contemporary, symbolic, repression. This revo- lution is ‘one war too late’ as regards the mode of repression. Put better (or worse), there is an insidious and widespread progression of primary repression which, by the mere fact of the ‘sexual revolution’, disturbingly merges with the ‘gentle’ repression under the sign of the management of narcissism discussed above. 17. [In this passage, Baudrillard is punning on the maternal function of the breast [sein] and being ‘in the midst’ or ‘at the heart of [au sein de] the ‘maternal’ society he here claims has displaced that of the law of the Father. – tr.] 18. This presupposes a type of exchange that has remained outside the dominance of incest prohibition and the law of the Father (such as the type of economic and linguistic exchange that we are familiar with), which is based on value and culminates in the system of exchange-value. This type of exchange exists: it is symbolic exchange which, by con- trast, is based on the annulment of value, and hence cancels the prohibition on which it is based and overcomes the law of the Father. Symbolic exchange is neither a regression within the law (towards incest), nor a pure and simple transgression (always dependent on the law), it is the revolution of this law. 19. Cf. Jean-François Lyotard, Discours, figure [Paris: Klincksieck, 1971], p. 23. 20. After the history of the body’s negativity comes the history of its positivity. The ambiguity of the current ‘revolution’ derives entirely from the fact that centuries of repression have based the body on value. Repressed, the body is charged with a transgressive virtuality of all values. Similarly however, we must understand that a long lasting and inextricable con- fusion between the body and a series of ‘materialist’ values (health, well-being, sexuality, liberty) has been at work in the shadows of repression. The concept of the body has grown 145 The Body, or the Mass Grave of Signs up in the shadow of a certain transcendental materialism which has slowly matured in the shadow of idealism as its revitalising solution, even bringing about its resurrection in accordance with determinate finalities, and operates as a dynamic element in the equi- librium of the new system of values. Nudity becomes the emblem of radical subjectivity. The body becomes the standard of the pulsions. But this liberation has something of the ambiguity of every liberation, in that it is here liberated as value. Just as labour is never ‘liberated’ as anything other than labour power in a system of forces of production and exchange-value, subjectivity is only ever liberated as a phantasm and sign-value in the framework of planned signification, a systematics of signification whose coincidence with the systematics of production is clear enough. In the final analysis, subjectivity is only ever ‘liberated’ in the sense that it is once again seized by political economy. 21. And the opposite of Ockham’s razor, which castrates and traces the taut thread of abstraction and reason. 5 Political Economy and Death The Extradition of the Dead As soon as savages began to call ‘men’ only those who were members of their tribe, the definition of the ‘Human’ was considerably enlarged: it became a universal concept. This is precisely what we call culture. Today all men are men. Universality is in fact based exclusively on tautology and doubling, and this is where the ‘Human’ takes on the force of a moral law and a principle of exclusion. This is because the ‘Human’ is from the out- set the institution of its structural double, the ‘Inhuman’. This is all it is: the progress of Humanity and Culture are simply the chain of discrimina- tions with which to brand ‘Others’ with inhumanity, and therefore with nullity. For the savages who call themselves ‘men’, the others are some- thing else. For us, by contrast, under the sign of the Human as a universal concept, others are nothing. In other cases, to be ‘man’ is, like being a gentleman, a challenge, a distinction experienced as a great struggle, not merely giving rise to an exchange of quality or status amongst different beings (gods, ancestors, foreigners, animals, nature …), but imposing its stakes universally, being praised and prohibited. We are happy to be pro- moted to the universal, to an abstract and generic value indexed on the equivalence of the species, to the exclusion of all the others. In some sense, therefore, the definition of the Human inexorably contracts in accordance with cultural developments: each ‘objective’ progressive step towards the universal corresponded to an ever stricter discrimination, until eventually we can glimpse the time of man’s definitive universality that will coincide with the excommunication of all men – the purity of the concept alone radiant in the void. Racism is modern. Previous races or cultures were ignored or eliminated, but never under the sign of a universal Reason. There is no criterion of man, no split from the Inhuman, there are only differences with which to oppose death. But it is our undifferentiated concept of man that gives rise to dis- crimination. We must read the following narrative by Jean de Léry, from the sixteenth century: Histoire d’un voyage en la terre de Brésil (‘The History of a Journey to the Land of Brazil’) to see that racism did not exist in this period when the Idea of Man does not yet cast its shadow over all the meta- physical purity of Western culture. This Reformation puritan from Geneva, landing amongst Brazilian cannibals, is not racist. It is due to the extent of our progress that we have since become racists, and not only towards Indians and cannibals: the increasing hold of rationality on our culture has 147 Political Economy and Death meant the successive extradition of inanimate nature, animals and inferior races1 into the Inhuman, while the cancer of the Human has invested the very society it claimed to contain within its absolute superiority. Michel Foucault has analysed the extradition of madmen at the dawn of Western modernity, but we also know of the extradition and progressive confine- ment of children, following the course of Reason itself, into the idealised state of infancy, the ghetto of the infantile universe and the abjection of innocence. But the old have also become inhuman, pushed to the fringes of normality. Like so many others, the mad, children and the old have only become ‘categories’ under the sign of the successive segregations that have marked the development of culture. The poor, the under-developed, those with subnormal IQs, perverts, transsexuals, intellectuals and women form a folklore of terror, a folklore of excommunication on the basis of an increas- ingly racist definition of the ‘normal human’. Quintessence of normality: ultimately all these ‘categories’ will be excluded, segregated, exiled in a finally universal society, where the normal and the universal will at last fuse under the sign of the Human.2 Foucault’s analysis, amongst the masterpieces of this genuine cultural history, takes the form of a genealogy of discrimination in which, at the start of the nineteenth century, labour and production occupy a decisive place. At the very core of the ‘rationality’ of our culture, however, is an exclusion that precedes every other, more radical than the exclusion of madmen, children or inferior races, an exclusion preceding all these and serving as their model: the exclusion of the dead and of death. There is an irreversible evolution from savage societies to our own: little by little, the dead cease to exist. They are thrown out of the group’s symbolic circulation. They are no longer beings with a full role to play, worthy part- ners in exchange, and we make this obvious by exiling them further and further away from the group of the living. In the domestic intimacy of the cemetery, the first grouping remains in the heart of the village or town, becoming the first ghetto, prefiguring every future ghetto, but are thrown further and further from the centre towards the periphery, finally having nowhere to go at all, as in the new town or the contemporary metropolis, where there are no longer any provisions for the dead, either in mental or in physical space. Even madmen, delinquents and misfits can find a wel- come in the new towns, that is, in the rationality of a modern society. Only the death-function cannot be programmed and localised. Strictly speaking, we no longer know what to do with them, since, today, it is not normal to be dead, and this is new. To be dead is an unthinkable anomaly; nothing else is as offensive as this. Death is a delinquency, and an incurable deviancy. The dead are no longer inflicted on any place or space-time, they can find no resting place; they are thrown into a radical utopia. They are no longer even packed in and shut up, but obliterated. But we know what these hidden places signify: the factory no longer exists because labour is everywhere; the prison no longer exists because arrests and confinements pervade social space-time; the asylum no longer Symbolic Exchange and Death148 exists because psychological control and therapy have been generalised and become banal; the school no longer exists because every strand of social progress is shot through with discipline and pedagogical training; capital no longer exists (nor does its Marxist critique) because the law of value has collapsed into self-managed survival in all its forms, etc., etc. The cemetery no longer exists because modern cities have entirely taken over their func- tion: they are ghost towns, cities of death. If the great operational metropolis is the final form of an entire culture, then, quite simply, ours is a culture of death.3 Survival, or the Equivalent to Death It is correct to say that the dead, hounded and separated from the living, condemn us to an equivalent death: for the fundamental law of symbolic obligation is at play in any case, for better or worse. Madness, then, is only ever the dividing line between the mad and the normal, a line which normal- ity shares with madness and which is even defined by it. Every society that internalises its mad is a society invested in its depths by madness, which alone and everywhere ends up being symbolically exchanged under the legal signs of normality. Madness has for several centuries worked hard on the society which confines it, and today the asylum walls have been removed, not because of some miraculous tolerance, but because madness has completed its normalising labour on society: madness has become pervasive, while at the same time it is forbidden a resting place. The asylum has been reabsorbed into the core of the social field, because normality has reached the point of perfection and assumed the characteristics of the asylum, because the virus of confinement has worked its way into every fibre of ‘normal’ existence. So it is with death. Death is ultimately nothing more than the social line of demarcation separating the ‘dead’ from the ‘living’: therefore, it affects both equally. Against the senseless illusion of the living of willing the living to the exclusion of the dead, against the illusion that reduces life to an absolute surplus-value by subtracting death from it, the indestructible logic of symbolic exchange re-establishes the equivalence of life and death in the indifferent fatality of survival. In survival, death is repressed; life itself, in accordance with that well known ebbing away, would be nothing more than a survival determined by death. The Ghetto Beyond the Grave The concept of immortality grew alongside the segregation of the dead. For the flip-side of death, this eminent status which is the mark of the ‘soul’ and ‘superior’ spiritualities, is only a story that conceals the real extradition of the dead and the rupturing of a symbolic exchange with them. When the dead are there, lifelike [vivants] but different from the living [vivants] whom they partner in multiple exchanges, they have no need to, and nei- ther is it necessary that they should, be immortal, since this fantastic quality shatters all reciprocity. It is only to the extent that they are excluded by the 149 Political Economy and Death living that they quietly become immortal, and this idealised survival is only the mark of their social exile. We must get rid of the idea of progress in religions, leading from animism to polytheism and then to monotheism, in the course of which an immortal soul progressively emerges. It is to the precise extent that the dead are con- fined that they are conferred an immortality, just as, in a similar way, we see life expectancy grow simultaneously with the segregation of pensioners, deemed asocial, in our societies. Immortality is progressive, and this is one of the strangest things. It pro- gresses in time, passing from limited to eternal survival; in social space, immortality becomes democratic and passes from being the privilege of a few to being everyone’s virtual right. This is relatively recent, however. In Egypt, certain members of the group (Pharoahs, then priests, chiefs, the wealthy, the initiates of the dominant class), according to the degree of their power, slowly broke away as immortals, others having only the right to death and the double. Towards the year 2000 bc, everyone accedes to immortality in a sort of social conquest, perhaps the outcome of a great struggle. Without attempting a social history or constructing a fiction, we can well imagine, in Egypt and the Great Dynasties, revolts and social movements demanding the right to immortality for all. In the beginning, then, immortality was a matter of an emblem of power and social transcendence. Where, in primitive groups, there were no struc- tures of political power, there was no personal immortality either. Consequently, in the least segmented societies, a ‘relative’ soul and a ‘restricted’ immortality correspond to a similarly relative transcendence of power structures. Then, with the Grand Empires, despotic societies of total transcendence of power, immortality is generalised and becomes eternal. The King or the Pharoah is the first to benefit from this advancement, but then, at a more advanced stage, issuing from God Himself who is immortality par excellence, immortality is democratically redistributed. But the phase of the immortal God, which coincides with the great universalist religions (and Christianity in particular), is already a phase of a huge abstraction of social power in the Roman Imperium. If the Greek gods were mortals, it is because they were bound to a specific culture and were not yet universal. In its initial stages, Christianity was not in accord over immortality, which was a late acquisition. The Church Fathers still admitted the provi- sional elimination of the soul awaiting resurrection. Even when St Paul preached the idea of resurrection, the pagans mocked him for it and even the Church Fathers had a deep resistance to it. In the Old Testament (Daniel), resurrection is promised only to those who have not received retribution during their lifetime for good or evil. The beyond of life, sur- vival, is only the settling of all accounts, existing only according to what remained unexchanged in life. Resurrection, or immortality, is a fine exam- ple of the last resort as regards the symbolic possibility of the archaic group’s immediate regulation of all its accounts, annulling all its symbolic debt without reference to an afterlife. Symbolic Exchange and Death150 Originally the distinctive emblem of power, the immortality of the soul acts, throughout Christianity, as an egalitarian myth, as a democratic beyond as opposed to worldly inequality before death. It is only a myth. Even in its most universalist Christian version, immortality only belongs to every human being by right: in fact, it is sparingly granted, remaining the privilege of a culture, and within this culture, the privilege of a specific social and political caste. Have the missionaries ever believed in the immor- tal soul of the natives? Has woman ever really had a soul in ‘classical’ Christianity? What about madmen, children and criminals? In fact it always comes down to this: only the rich and powerful have a soul. Social, political and economic inequality (life expectancy, prestigious funerals, glory and living on in men’s memories) before death is only ever the effect of this fundamental discrimination: some, the only real ‘human beings’, have the right to immortality; others have only the right to death. Nothing has changed greatly since Egypt and the Great Dynasties. ‘What does immortality matter?’ the naïve materialist will say, ‘It’s all imaginary.’ Yes, and it is exciting to see that this is where the basis of the real social discrimination lies, and that nowhere else are power and social transcendence so clearly marked than in the imaginary. The economic power of capital is based in the imaginary just as much as is the power of the Church: capital is only its fantastic secularisation. We can also see that democracy changes nothing here. We used to be able to fight in order to gain immortality for the souls of all, just as gener- ations of proletarians fought in order to gain equality in terms of goods and culture. It is the same fight, the former for survival in the beyond, and the latter for survival here. It is the same trap: the personal immortality of a few resulting, as we have seen, in the break-up of the group – so what’s the point of demanding immortality for all? It is simply to generalise the imag- inary. The revolution can only consist in the abolition of the separation of death, and not in equality of survival. Immortality is only a kind of general equivalent bound to the abstraction of linear time (taking form as soon as time becomes this abstract dimension bound to the process of political-economic accumulation and, in short, to the abstraction of life). Death Power The emergence of survival can therefore be analysed as the fundamental operation in the birth of power. Not only because this set-up will permit the necessity of the sacrifice of this life and the threat of recompense in the next (this is exactly the priest-caste’s strategy), but more profoundly by instituting the prohibition of death and, at the same time, the agency that oversees this prohibition of death: power. Shattering the union of the living and the dead, and slapping a prohibition on death and the dead: the pri- mary source of social control. Power is possible only if death is no longer free, only if the dead are put under surveillance, in anticipation of the 151 Political Economy and Death future confinement of life in its entirety. This is the fundamental Law, and power is the guardian at the gates of this Law. It is not the repression of unconscious pulsions, libido, or whatever other energy that is fundamental, and it is not anthropological; it is the repression of death, the social repres- sion of death in the sense that this is what facilitates the shift towards the repressive socialisation of life. Historically, we know that sacerdotal power is based on a monopoly over death and exclusive control over relations with the dead.4 The dead are the first restricted area, the exchange of whom is restored by an obligatory mediation by the priests. Power is established on death’s borders. It will subsequently be sustained by further separations (the soul and the body, the male and the female, good and evil, etc.) that have infinite ramifications, but the principal separation is between life and death. 5 When the French say that power ‘holds the bar’, 6 it is no metaphor: it is the bar between life and death, the decree that suspends exchange between life and death, the tollgate and border control between the two banks. This is precisely the way in which power will later be instituted between the subject separated from its body, between the individual separated from its social body, between man separated from his labour: the agency of mediation and representation flourishes in this rupture. We must take note, however, that the archetype of this operation is the separation between a group and its dead, or between each of us today and our own deaths. Every form of power will have something of this smell about it, because it is on the manipulation and administration of death that power, in the final analysis, is based. All the agencies of repression and control are installed in this divided space, in the suspense between a life and its proper end, that is, in the pro- duction of a literally fantastic and artificial temporality (since at every instant every life has its proper death there already, that is to say, in this same instant lies the finality it attains). The first abstract social time is installed in this rupture of the indivisible unity of life and death (well before abstract social labour time!). All the future forms of alienation that Marx denounces, the separations and abstractions of political economy, take root in this separation of death. The economic operation consists in life taking death hostage. This is a residual life which can from now on be read in the operational terms of calculation and value. For example, in Chamisso’s The Man who Lost his Shadow, Peter Schlemil becomes a rich and powerful capitalist once his shadow has been lost (once death is taken hostage: the pact with the Devil is only ever a political-economic pact). Life given over to death: the very operation of the symbolic. The Exchange of Death in the Primitive Order Savages have no biological concept of death. Or rather, the biological fact, that is, death, birth or disease, everything that comes from nature and that Symbolic Exchange and Death152 we accord the privilege of necessity and objectivity, quite simply has no meaning for them. This is absolute disorder, since it cannot be symbolically exchanged, and what cannot be symbolically exchanged constitutes a mor- tal danger for the group. 7 They are unreconciled, unexpiated, sorcerous and hostile forces that prowl around the soul and the body, that stalk the living and the dead; defunct, cosmic energies that the group was unable to bring under control through exchange. We have de-socialised death by overturning bio-anthropological laws, by according it the immunity of science and by making it autonomous, as indi- vidual fatality. But the physical materiality of death, which paralyses us through the ‘objective’ credence we give it, does not stop the primitives. They have never ‘naturalised’ death, they know that death (like the body, like the natural event) is a social relation, that its definition is social. In this they are much more ‘materialist’ than we are, since for them the real mate- riality of death, like that of the commodity for Marx, lies in its form, which is always the form of a social relation. Instead, all our idealism converges on the illusion of a biological materiality of death: our discourse of ‘reality’, which is in fact the discourse of the imaginary, surpasses the primitives in the intervention of the symbolic. Initiation is the accented beat of the operation of the symbolic. It aims neither to conjure death away, nor to ‘overcome’ it, but to articulate it socially. As R. Jaulin describes in La Mort Sara [Paris: Plon, 1967], the ancestral group ‘swallows the koys’ (young initiation candidates), who die ‘symbolically’ in order to be reborn. Above all, we must avoid understand- ing this according to the degraded meaning we attach to it, but in the sense that their death becomes the stakes of a reciprocal-antagonistic exchange between the ancestors and the living. Further, instead of a break, a social relation between the partners is established, a circulation of gifts and counter-gifts as intense as the circulation of precious goods and women: an incessant play of responses where death can no longer establish itself as end or agency. By offering her a piece of flesh, the brother gives his wife to a dead member of the family, in order to bring him back to life. By nourishing her, this dead man is included in the life of the group. But the exchange is reciprocal. The dead man gives his wife, the clan’s land, to a living member of the family in order to come back to life by assimilating himself to her and to bring her back to life by assimilating her to himself. The important moment is when the moh (the grand priests) put the koy (the initiates) to death, so that the latter are then consumed by their ancestors, then the earth gives birth to them as their mother had given birth to them. After having been ‘killed’, the initiates are left in the hands of their initiatory, ‘cultural’ parents, who instruct them, care for them and train them (initiatory birth). It is clear that the initiation consists in an exchange being established where there had been only a brute fact: they pass from natural, aleatory and irreversible death to a death that is given and received, and that is therefore reversible in the social exchange, ‘soluble’ in exchange. At the same time 153 Political Economy and Death the opposition between birth and death disappears: they can also be exchanged under the form of symbolic reversibility. Initiation is the crucial moment, the social nexus, the darkroom where birth and death stop being the terms of life and twist into one another again; not towards some mysti- cal fusion, but in this instance to turn the initiate into a real social being. The uninitiated child has only been born biologically, he has only one ‘real’ father and one ‘real’ mother; in order to become a social being he must pass through the symbolic event of the initiatory birth/death, he must have gone through the circuit of life and death in order to enter into the symbolic reality of exchange. It is not, in this initiatory test, a matter of staging a second birth to eclipse death. Jaulin himself leans towards this interpretation: society ‘conjured’ death away, or even opposed it ‘dialectically’, in the initiation, to a term of his invention which it uses and ‘overcomes’: ‘To the life and death they are given, men have added initiation, by means of which they transcend the disorder of death.’ This formula is very beautiful and very ambiguous at the same time, since initiation is not ‘added’ to the other terms, and it doesn’t play life off against death towards a rebirth (we are extremely suspicious of those who triumph over death!). It is the splitting of life and death that initiation conjures away, and with it the concomi- tant fatality which weighs down on life as soon as it is split in this way. For life then becomes this biological irreversibility, this absurd physical destiny, life has then been lost in advance, since it is condemned to decline with the body. Hence the idealisation of one of these terms, birth (and its doubling in resurrection) at the expense of the other, death. This, how- ever, is simply one of our ingrained prejudices concerning the ‘sense’ or ‘meaning of life’. For birth, as an irreversible individual event, is as trau- matising as death. Psychoanalysis puts this differently: birth is a sort of death. And with baptism, Christianity has done nothing more than, through a collective ritual, to define the mortal event of birth. The advent of life is a crime of sorts, if it is not repeated and expiated by a collective simulacrum of death. Life is only a benefit in itself within the calculable order of value. In the symbolic order, life, like everything else, is a crime if it survives unilaterally, if it is not seized and destroyed, given and returned, ‘returned’ to death. Initiation effaces this crime by resolving the separate event of life and death in one and the same social act of exchange. Symbolic / Real / Imaginary The symbolic is neither a concept, an agency, a category, nor a ‘structure’, but an act of exchange and a social relation which puts an end to the real, which resolves the real, and, at the same time, puts an end to the opposition between the real and the imaginary. The initiatory act is the reverse of our reality principle. It shows that the reality of birth derives solely from the separation of life and death. Even the reality of life itself derives solely from the disjunction of life and death. Symbolic Exchange and Death154 The effect of the real is only ever therefore the structural effect of the dis- junction between two terms, and our famous reality principle, with its normative and repressive implications, is only a generalisation of this dis- junctive code to all levels. The reality of nature, its ‘objectivity’ and its ‘materiality’, derives solely from the separation of man and nature, of a body and a non-body, as Octavio Paz put it. Even the reality of the body, its material status, derives from the disjunction of a spiritual principle, from discriminating a soul from a body. The symbolic is what puts an end to this disjunctive code and to sepa- rated terms. It is the u-topia that puts an end to the topologies of the soul and the body, man and nature, the real and the non-real, birth and death. In the symbolic operation, the two terms lose their reality.8 The reality principle is never anything other than the imaginary of the other term. In the man/nature partition, nature (objective, material) is only the imaginary of man thus conceptualised. In the sexual bipartition masculine/feminine, an arbitrary and structural distinction on which the sexual reality (and repression) principle is based, ‘woman’ thus defined is only ever man’s imaginary. Each term of the disjunction excludes the other, which eventually becomes its imaginary. So it is with life and death in our current system: the price we pay for the ‘reality’ of this life, to live it as a positive value, is the ever-present phan- tasm of death. For us, defined as living beings, death is our imaginary.9 So, all the disjunctions on which the different structures of the real are based (this is not in the least abstract: it is also what separates the teacher from the taught, and on which the reality principle of their relation is based; the same goes for all the social relations we know) have their archetype in the fundamental disjunction of life and death. This is why, in whatever field of ‘reality’, every separate term for which the other is its imaginary is haunted by the latter as its own death. Thus the symbolic everywhere puts an end to the fascination with the real and the imaginary, to the closure of the phantasm drawn up by psycho- analysis, but where, at the same time, psychoanalysis locks itself up by establishing, through a considerable quantity of disjunctions (primary and secondary processes, unconscious and conscious, etc.), a psychical reality principle of the unconscious inseparable from psychoanalysis’s own reality principle (the unconscious as psychoanalysis’s reality principle!) and thus in which the symbolic cannot but put an end to psychoanalysis too.10 The Inevitable Exchange The real event of death is imaginary. Where the imaginary creates a sym- bolic disorder, initiation restores symbolic order. Incest prohibition does the same thing in the domain of filiation: the group responds to the real, natu- ral, ‘asocial’ event of biological filiation by a system of alliance and the exchange of women. It is essential that everything (women in this case, but otherwise birth and death) becomes available for exchange, that is, comes 155 Political Economy and Death under the jurisdiction of the group. Incest prohibition, in this sense, is inter- dependent with and complementary to initiation, in that in the one case young initiates circulate amongst the living adults and the dead ancestors: they are given and returned, whereby they accede to symbolic recognition. In the other case, it is women who circulate: they too only attain real social status once given and returned, instead of being retained by the father or brothers for their own use. ‘Whosoever gives nothing, whether his daughter or his sister, is dead.’11 Incest prohibition lies at the basis of alliances amongst the living. Initiation lies at the basis of alliances amongst the living and the dead. This is the fun- damental fact that separates us from the primitives: exchange does not stop when life comes to an end. Symbolic exchange is halted neither by the living nor by the dead (nor by stones or beasts). This is an absolute law: obligation and reciprocity are insurmountable. None can withdraw from it, for whom- or whatever’s sake, on pain of death. Death is nothing other than this: taken hostage by the cycle of symbolic exchanges (cf. Marcel Mauss, ‘L’effet phy- sique chez l’individu de l’idée de mort suggérée par la collectivité’, in Sociologie et Anthropologie [4th edn, Paris: PUF, 1968]).12 But we could also say that this does not separate us from the primitives, and that it is exactly the same for us. Throughout the entire system of polit- ical economy, the law of symbolic exchange has not changed one iota: we continue to exchange with the dead, even those denied rest, those for whom rest is prohibited. We simply pay with our own death and our anxi- ety about death for the rupture of symbolic exchanges with them. It is profoundly similar with inanimate nature and beasts. Only an absurd the- ory of liberty could claim that we are quits with the dead, since the debt is universal and unceasing: we never manage to ‘return’ what we have taken for all this ‘liberty’. This huge litigation, involving all the obligations and reciprocities that we have denounced, is properly the unconscious. No need for a libido, for desire, for an energetics or for the pulsions and their desti- nations to give an account of this. The unconscious is social in the sense that it is made up of all that could not be exchanged socially or symbolically. And so it is with death: it is exchanged in any case, and, at best, it will be exchanged in accordance with a social ritual, as with the primitives; at worst, it will be ‘redeemed’ by an individual labour of mourning. The unconscious is subject in its entirety to the distortion of the death of a symbolic process (exchange, ritual) into an economic process (redemption, labour, debt, indi- vidual). This entails a considerable difference in enjoyment: we trade with our dead in a kind of melancholy, while the primitives live with their dead under the auspices of the ritual and the feast. The Unconscious and the Primitive Order The reciprocity of life and death, which entails their exchange in a social cycle instead of being cut up according to biological linearity or the repetition of the phantasm, the reabsorption of the prohibition separating the living Symbolic Exchange and Death156 from the dead that rebounds so violently on the living; all this puts the very hypothesis of the unconscious into question again. In his Oedipe africain [Paris: Plon, 1969], Edmond Ortigues asks what it means ‘to marry one’s mother’ and ‘to kill one’s father’: The verb ‘to marry’ has a different meaning in different contexts, it has not got the same social and psychological content. As for the verb ‘to kill’, apparently so clear-cut, are we quite certain that it holds no surprises? What then is a ‘dead father’ in a country where the ancestors are so close to the living? … Everything changes, requiring us to re-examine the meaning of each term. In a society under the sway of ancestral law, it is impossible for the indi- vidual to kill the father, since, according to the customs of the Ancients, the father is always already dead and always still living. … To take the father’s death upon oneself or to individualise the moral consciousness by reducing paternal authority to that of a mortal, a substitutable person separable from the ancestral altar and from ‘custom’, would be to leave the group, to remove oneself from the basis of tribal society. When we talk of the dissolution of the Oedipus complex, we think of an individually experienced drama. But what might this be in a tribal society where the religion of ‘fertility’ and the ‘ancestors’ proposes as the explicit basis of the collective tradition what, for us, the young Oedipus is condemned to live out in his personal phantasms? Therefore, the ‘symbolic function’ in primitive societies is articulated not through the law of the Father and the individual psychical reality principle, but from the outset through a collective principle, through the collective movement of exchanges. In the initiation, we have seen how, by means of a social process, the biological figures of filiation break up in order to make way for the initiatory parents. These parents are symbolic figures who refer to the socius, that is, to all the fathers and mothers of the clan, and ulti- mately to the dead fathers, the ancestors, and to the clan’s earth mother. The instance of the Father does not appear, it is broken down into the col- lectivity of rival brothers (initiates). ‘Aggressivity will be displaced along a horizontal line, into fraternal rivalry, overcompensated by an extremely powerful solidarity’ (Ortigues, ibid.). (Why ‘will be displaced’? As if it were normally directed onto the Father?) Opposed to the Oedipus principle, which corresponds to the negative aspect of incest prohibition (prohibited with the mother and imposed by the father) is, in the positive sense, a princi- ple of the exchange of sisters by brothers. It is the sister, and not the mother, who is at the centre of this apparatus, and it is at the level of brothers that the whole social act of exchange is organised. Therefore, no desocial- ised Oedipal triangle, no closed familial structure sanctioned by prohibition and the dominant Word of the Father, but a principle of exchange between peers, on the basis of the challenge and reciprocity: an autonomous principle of social organisation. The appearence of the concept of the gift was implemented at the core of one and the same age group in an atmosphere of equality. The sacrifice to which the child consents in the nursery to benefit another child is not of the same order as separation from the mother. (Ortigues, ibid.) 157 Political Economy and Death All this tells of a social principle of exchange opposed to a psychical principle of prohibition. All this tells of a symbolic process opposed to an unconscious process. Nowhere in the primitive order, since it is well ventilated and res- olutely social, does there emerge the psychically over-determined biological triad of the family, with the psychical apparatus and the intertwined phan- tasms, as its double, the whole thing crowned by the fourth purely ‘symbolic’ term, the phallus. The phallus is ‘strictly necessary in order to introduce a relation to the level of speech, and to make it into a reciprocal law of recog- nition amongst subjects’. It is here, in fact (at least in psychoanalytic theory), that the Name of the Father, the signifier of the Law, is inscribed for us, and alone introduces us into exchange. The famous ploy of the Word of the Father protects us against mortal fusion with, and absorption by, the desire for the mother. Without the phallus, there is no salvation. The necessity of this Law and of a symbolic agency barring the subject, thanks to which the primary repression at the basis of the formation of the unconsious is implemented, by the same token gives the subject access to his own desire. Without this agency to arrange exchanges, without the mediation of the phallus, the sub- ject, incapable of repression, no longer even gains access to the symbolic and sinks into psychosis. Because they were effectively ignorant of this Law, and the structure of repres- sion and the unconscious which it entails, we were able to say that primitive societies were ‘psychotic’ societies. Of course, this is simply our fierce way of abandoning them to their gentle madness (if not to see, as begins to happen in the psychoanalytic West itself, whether psychosis might not conceal a more radical meaning, a more radical symbolicity than we have ever glimpsed under the sign of psychoanalysis). Yes, these societies have access to the symbolic.13 No, they do not gain access to the symbolic by means of the intercession of an immutable Law, the image of which is sketched in the social order itself: the Father, the Chief, the Signifier and Power. The symbolic is not an agency here, so that access to it would be regulated by the mediation of a Phallus, an upper- case figure to embody all the metonymic figures of the Law. The symbolic is precisely this cycle of exchanges, the cycle of giving and returning, an order born of the very reversibility which escapes the double jurisdiction, the repressed psychical agency, and the transcendent social instance.14 When fathers are exchanged, given, received and transmitted from one generation of initiates to the other in the form of already dead and always living ancestors (the biological father is himself inexchangeable, no-one can stand in for him, and his symbolic figure, his word, is immutable; it too remains unexchanged, a word with no response); when the mother (the ancestral grounds put at stake with each successive initiation), is given, received and transmitted (this is also the tribal language, the secret language to which the initiate gains access) by the fathers, then everything – the father, the mother and the word – loses its character as a fatal and indeci- pherable agency, even its position in a structure controlled by prohibition (just as birth and death lose their status as fatal events, as necessity and as law, in the symbolic hyperevent of initiation). Symbolic Exchange and Death158 If we can speak of a society with neither repression nor unconscious, it is not in order to rediscover some miraculous innocence where the flows of ‘desire’ roam freely and the primary processes are realised with- out prohibition. This is an order of the dispressed [défoulé], an idealism of desire and the libido such as haunts Freudo-Reichian, Freudo-Marxist and even schizo-nomadic imaginations: the phantasm of a desire or a (machined) unconscious naturalised in order to be ‘liberated’. The phan- tasm of ‘liberty’ has today been transferred from the spheres of rational thought to those of the irrational, the brute, the ‘primary’ and the uncon- scious while, however, remaining a bourgeois problematic (namely the Cartesian and Kantian problematic of freedom and necessity). To put the theory of the unconscious into question is also to put the theory of Desire into question, in that here, at the level of an entire civili- sation, it is always simply a matter of a negative phantasm of the rational order. Hence Desire becomes an integral part of our reigning prohibition, its dreamt materiality becomes part of our imaginary. Whether it is dialec- tically related to the prohibition, as with Oedipus and psychoanalysis, or whether it is exalted in its brute productivity, as in Deleuze and Guattari’s Anti-Oedipus, it remains the promise of a savage naturality, the phantasm of an objective, liberatory pulsional energy to be liberated – a force of desire inherited from the mobile field of revolutions: good old labour force. As we know, the effect of force is always the effect of repression, as the effect of reality is always the effect of the imaginary. We must write the ‘Mirror of Desire’ as we have written The Mirror of Production. An example: primitive cannibalism. Apart from the question of suste- nance, this is a problem of the ‘oral drive’ of devouring, on which there weighs a fundamental (perhaps even the most fundamental) prohibition for us, whereas certain primitives would naïvely transgress and fulfil their ‘desire’ through this very process. A postulate: every man would like to devour his fellow man, and when, due to necessity, a Catholic rugby team did just this after their plane crashed in the Cordillère des Andes, the whole world was astonished at this divine resurgence of a nature they thought dead and buried. Even the Pope blessed and exculpated them, so as not to make them into an example; nevertheless, this is no longer abso- lutely a crime. And why not, if only by reference to a nature whose consecration (unconscious and psychoanalytic), whose libidinal consecra- tion is today in competition with the sanctity of the divine and the religious? Cannibals themselves do not claim to live in a state of nature, nor in accordance with their desire at all; they quite simply claim, through their cannibalism, to live in a society, the most interesting case being a society that eats its own dead. This is neither due to a vital necessity nor because the dead no longer count for anything, quite the contrary: it is in order to pay homage to them and thus to prevent those left to rot in accor- dance with the natural order, escaping from the social order, turning against the group and persecuting it. This devouring is a social act, a sym- bolic act, that aims to maintain a tissue of bonds with the dead man or the 159 Political Economy and Death enemy they devour. In any case they don’t just eat anybody, as we know; whoever is eaten is always somebody worthy, it is always a mark of respect to devour somebody since, through this, the devoured even becomes sacred. We scorn what we eat, we can only eat what we despise, that is, death, the inanimate, the animal or the vegetable condemned to biological assimilation. We think of anthropophagia as despicable in view of the fact that we despise what we eat, the act of eating and ultimately even our own bodies. Primitive devouring is ignorant of the abstract separation of the eater and the eaten into the active and the passive. Between the two there is a duel mode, combining honour and reciprocity, perhaps even a chal- lenge and a duel tout court, which the eaten can eventually win (cf. the whole ritual of propitiation as regards nourishment). In any event, it is not a mechanical act of absorption. 15 It is not even an absorption of the ‘vital forces’, as ethnologists, following the natives, communally claim, merely passing from an alimentary to a magical functionalism (the psychoanalysts adhere to a psychical functionalism of the pulsion). Devouring, no longer just an act of subsistence, nor a transubstantiation of manna benefiting the eater, is a social act, a sacrificial process where the metabolism of the whole group is at stake. Neither the fulfilment of desire nor the assimilation of something or other, it is on the contrary an act of expenditure, consump- tion or consummation, and of the transmutation of the flesh into a symbolic relation, the transformation of the body in social exchange. We find the same thing in the Eucharist, but in the abstract form of the sacra- ment, using the general equivalence of bread and wine. The accursed share consumed here is already considerably sublimated and evangelised. Killing no longer has the same meaning for us. The ritual murder of the king has nothing to do with the ‘psychoanalytic’ murder of the father. Behind the obligation to expiate the privilege the king retains through death, his murder aims to keep what threatened to accumulate and become fixed on the king’s person (status, wealth, women and power) within the flow of exchanges, within the group’s reciprocal movements. His death prevents this accident. This is the essence and function of sacri- fice: to extinguish what threatens to fall out of the group’s symbolic control and to bury it under all the weight of the dead. The king must be killed from time to time, along with the phallus which began to rule over social life. The king’s murder does not therefore come from the depths of the unconscious or from the figure of the father, on the contrary, it is our unconscious and its peripeteia that result in the loss of sacrificial mecha- nisms. We now only conceive of murder within a closed economy, as the phantasmatic murder of the father, that is, as the balance of repression and the law, as the fulfilment of desire and as the regulation of the accounts. The stake is phallic, and it is certain that it is on the basis of repression that, with the death of the father, the phallic peripeteia of the seizure of power enters the game. This is an extremely simplified rewriting of death and murder as repressed aggression, as a violence equivalent to the vio- lence of repression. In the primitive order, murder is neither violence nor Symbolic Exchange and Death160 an acting-out of the unconscious. So for those who kill the king, there is no seizure of power nor any increase in guilt, as there is in the Freudian myth. Neither does the king simply endure this. Instead, he gives his death, returns it in exchange, and marks it with the feast, whereas the phantas- matic murder of the father is lived as the experience of guilt and anxiety. Thus, neither killing nor eating have the same meaning for us: they do not result in a ‘murder-pulsion’, in an oral sadism, nor in a structure of repression, which alone gives them the meaning they have for us today. They are social acts that rigorously follow the apparatus of symbolic obli- gation. Amongst other things, they never have the unilateral meaning in which all the aggression at the basis of our culture is expressed: killing– eating – I kill I eat – you are killed, you are eaten. The unconscious and all its phantasms (and their psychoanalytic theory) presuppose the acknowledgement of this disjunction, the repression of ambivalence, the restitution of which, under whatever form it may be, in the symbolic process, puts an end to the jurisdiction of the unconscious. KILLING POSSESSING DEVOURING – the entirety of our individ- ual unconscious is organised around these terms and the phantasmas that surround them, under the sign of repression. GIVING RETURNING EXCHANGING – with the primitives, every- thing operates in the manifest collective exchange around these three terms, in the myths that underlie them. Each of these ‘verbs’ of the unconscious presupposes a break, a rupture, the bar we find everywhere in psychoanalysis, along with the guilt it gives rise to, the play and the repetition of the prohibition. The ‘verbs’ of the symbolic assume on the contrary a reversibility, an indefinite cyclical transition. Above all, however, the radical difference lies in the autonomisation of a psychical sphere: something operates collectively in primitive societies, the repression of which works for us solely on the agency of the psychical appa- ratus and the unconscious. The ritual is utterly different to the phantasm, as is the myth from the unconscious. All the analogies on which anthropology and psychoanalysis play are profound mystifications. The distortion that psychoanalysis submits primitive societies to is of the same order, but in the opposite sense than what they have to endure under Marxist analysis. 1. For the anthropo-Marxists, the economic instance is also present and determinant in the type of society, it is merely hidden, latent, whereas for us it is manifest. This difference is judged to be secondary, however; the analysis does not stop and passes without meeting any opposition onto its materialist discourse. 2. For the anthropo-psychoanalysts, the agency of the unconscious is also present and determinant in this type of society; it is simply manifested, externalised, whereas for us it is latent, repressed. This difference remains inessential, however, and the analysis continues without dis- guising its discourse in terms of the unconscious. 161 Political Economy and Death On both sides there is the same misrecognition [méconnaissance] of this apparently miniscule difference: for one and the same structure, the econ- omy or the unconscious, we pass from primitive formations to our own, now from the manifest to the hidden, now the reverse. Only our own meta- physics could neglect this detail, in the illusion that the content remains the same. But this is radically false: when the economic ‘is hidden behind’ other structures, it quite simply ceases to exist; it provides no account of anything, it is nothing. On the other hand, when the unconscious is ‘manifest’, when it becomes a manifest and articulated structure, it is no longer unconscious at all. A psychical structure and a process based on repression have no meaning in the other, ritual and non-psychical configuration of an overt resolution of signs. Everything changes when we pass from the latent to the mani- fest, and from the manifest to the latent.16 This is why, against Marxist and psychoanalytic misrecognition, we must start over again beginning from this displacement. We will come to see that the impossibility of locating and specifying the economic is due precisely to the symbolic. And that the possibility of overtly manifesting something unconscious, but which by this very fact ceases to be so, is also due to the symbolic. The Double and the Split The figure of the double, intimately bound up with figures of death and magic, poses in itself all the problems of psychological and psychoanalytic interpretation. Shadow, spectre, reflection, image; a material spirit almost remains visible, the primitive double generally passes for the crude prefiguration of the soul and consciousness in accordance with an increasing sublima- tion and a spiritual ‘hominisation’, as in Teilhard de Chardin: towards the apogee of a single God and a universal morality. But this single God has everything to do with the form of a unified political power, and nothing to do with the primitive gods. In the same way, soul and consciousness have everything to do with a principle of the subject’s unification, and nothing to do with the primitive double. On the contrary, the historical advent of the ‘soul’ puts an end to a proliferating exchange with spirits and doubles which, as an indirect consequence, gives rise to another figure of the double, wending its diabolical way just beneath the surface of Western reason. Once again, this figure has everything to do with the Western figure of alienation, and nothing to do with the primitive double. The telescoping of the two under the sign of psychology (conscious or unconscious) is only a misleading rewriting. Between the primitive and its double, there is neither a mirror relation nor one of abstraction, as there is between the subject and its spiritual prin- ciple, the soul, or between the subject and its moral and psychological principle, consciousness. There is no sign of such a reason common to both the primitive and its double, no relation of ideal equivalence that structures Symbolic Exchange and Death162 the subject for us to the point of splitting it. The double is no longer a fan- tastic ectoplasm, an archaic resurgence issuing from guilt and the depths of the unconscious (we will come back to this). The double, like the dead man (the dead man is the double of the living, the double is the familiar living figure of the dead), is a partner with whom the primitive has a personal and concrete relationship, sometimes happy, sometimes not, a certain type of visible exchange (word, gesture and ritual) with an invisible part of himself. We cannot speak of alienation here, for the subject is only alienated (like we are) when he internalises an abstract agency, issuing from the ‘other world’, as Nietzsche said – whether psychological (the ego and the ego-ideal), reli- gious (God and the soul) or moral (conscience and the law) – an irreconcilable agency to which everything else is subordinated. Historically then, alienation begins with the internalisation of the Master by the eman- cipated slave: there is no alienation as long as the duel-relation of the master and the slave lasts. The primitive has a non-alienated duel-relation with his double. He really can trade, as we are forever forbidden to do, with his shadow (the real shadow, not a metaphor), as with some original, living thing, in order to converse, protect and conciliate this tutelary or hostile shadow. The shadow is precisely not the reflection of an ‘original’ body, it has a full part to play, and is consequently not an ‘alienated’ part of the subject, but one of the figures of exchange. In another context, this is precisely what poets find when they question their own body, or interpellate words in language. To speak to one’s body and to speak to language in a duel mode beyond the active and the passive (my body speaks (to) me, language speaks (to) me) – to make each fragment of the body and each fragment of language autonomous, like a living being, capable of responding and exchanging – is to bring about the end of separation and the split, which is only the submissive equivalence of each part of the body to the princi- ple of the subject, and the submissive equivalence of each fragment of language to the code of language. The status of the double (as well as that of spirits and gods, which are also real, living and different beings, not idealised essences) in primitive society is therefore the inverse of our alienation: one being multiplies into innumerable others just as alive as the first, whereas the unified, individual subject can only confront itself in alienation and death. With the internalisation of the soul and consciousness (the principle of identity and equivalence), the subject undergoes a real confinement, similar to the confinement of the mad in the seventeenth century as described by Foucault. It is at this point that the primitive thought of the double as con- tinuity and exchange is lost, and the haunting double comes to the fore as the subject’s discontinuity in death and madness. ‘Whoever sees his double, sees his death.’ A vengeful and vampiric double, an unquiet soul, the double begins to prefigure the subject’s death, haunting him in the very midst of his life. This is Dostoevsky’s double, or Peter Schlemihl’s, the man who lost 163 Political Economy and Death his shadow. We have always interpreted this double as a metaphor of the soul, consciousness, native soil, and so on. Without this incurable idealism and without being taken as a metaphor, the narrative is so much more extraordinary. We have all lost our real shadows, we no longer speak to them, and our bodies have left with them. To lose one’s shadow is already to forget one’s body. Conversely, when the shadow grows and becomes an autonomous power (as with the mirror-image in The Student of Prague, which has the effect of the Devil and dementia), it is so as to devour the subject who has lost it, it is a murderous shadow, the image of all the rejected and forgotten dead who, as is quite normal, never accept being nothing in the eyes of the living. Our entire culture is full of this haunting of the separated double, even in its most subtle form, as Freud gave it in ‘Das Unheimliche’ (‘The Uncanny’: ‘Disturbing Strangeness’ or ‘Disturbing Familiarity’): the anx- iety that wells up around the most familiar things. Here the vertigo of separation builds up to its greatest intensity, since this is its simplest form. There comes a moment, in fact, when the things closest to us, such as our own bodies, the body itself, our voice and our appearance, are separated from us to the precise extent that we internalise the soul (or any other equivalent agency or abstraction) as the ideal principle of subjectivity. This is what kills off the proliferation of doubles and spirits, consigning them once again to the spectral, embryonic corridors of unconscious folklore, like the ancient gods that Christianity verteufelt, that is, transformed into demons. By a final ruse of spirituality, this internalisation also psychologises dou- bles. In fact it is interpretation in terms of an archaic psychical apparatus that is the very last form of the Verteufelung, the demonic corruption and elimination of the primitive double: projection of the guilt attached to the phantasmatic murder of the other (the close relative) in accordance with the magic of the omnipotence of ideas (Allmacht der Gedanken), the return of the repressed, etc. In ‘The Uncanny’, Freud writes: Our analysis of instances of the uncanny has led us back to the old, animis- tic conception of the universe. This was characterised by the idea that the world was peopled with the spirits of human beings; by the subject’s narcis- sistic overvaluation of his own mental processes; by the belief in the omnipotence of thoughts and the technique of magic based on that belief; by the attribution to various outside persons and things of carefully graded magical powers, or ‘mana’; as well as by all the other creations with the help of which man, in the unrestricted narcissism of that stage of development, strove to fend off the manifest prohibitions of reality. It seems as if each one of us has been through a phase of individual development corresponding to the animistic stage in primitive men, that none of us has passed through it without preserving certain residues and traces of it which are still capable of manifesting themselves, and that everything which now strikes us as ‘uncanny’ fulfils the condition of touching those residues of animistic men- tal activity within us and bringing them back to expression. (Standard Edition, Vol. 17, 1955, pp. 240–41) Symbolic Exchange and Death164 This is how psychology, our authority in the depths, our own ‘next world’, this omnipotence, magical narcissism, fear of the dead,17 this animism or primitive psychical apparatus, is quietly palmed off on the savages in order then to recuperate them for ourselves as ‘archaic traces’. Freud does not think this is what he said in speaking of ‘narcissistic overvaluation of … mental processes’. If there is such an overvaluation of one’s own mental processes (to the point of exporting this theory, as we have done with our morality and techniques, to the core of every culture), then it is Freud’s overvaluation, along with our whole psychologistic culture. The jurisdic- tion of the psychological discourse over all symbolic practices (such as the dazzling practices of the savages, death, the double and magic; but also over our current symbolic practices) is even more dangerous than that of the economistic discourse: it is of the same order as the repressive jurisdiction of the soul and consciousness over the body’s entire symbolic potential. Psychoanalysis’s reinterpretation of the symbolic is a reductive operation. Since we live under the unconscious (but is this the case? Isn’t it our own myth, marking out and even participating in repression: a repressed thought of repression?), we believe that we are justified in extending the jurisdiction of psychical history as we used to do with history itself, to every possible configuration. The unconscious, and the psychical order in general, becomes the insurmountable agency, giving the feudal right of trespass over every previous individual and social formation. This imaginary also spreads into the future, however: if the unconscious is our modern myth, and psycho- analysis its prophet, the liberation of the unconscious (Desiring-Revolution) is its millenial heresy. The idea of the unconscious, like the idea of consciousness, remains an idea of discontinuity and rupture. Put simply, it substitutes the irrevers- ibility of a lost object and a subject forever ‘missing’ itself, for the positivity of the object and the conscious subject. However decentred, the subject remains within the orbit of Western thought, with its succes- sive ‘topologies’ (hell/heaven – subject/nature – conscious/unconscious), where the fragmented subject can only dream of a lost continuity. 18 It will never get back to, or catch up with [rejoindre] utopia, which is not at all the phantasm of a lost order but, contrary to all the topologies of discon- tinuity and repression, the idea of a duelling order, of reversibility, of a symbolic order (in the strong etymological sense of the term) where, for example, death is not a separate space; where neither the subject’s own body nor its own shadow are separate spaces; where there is no death putting an end to the history of the body; where there is no bar putting an end to the ambivalence of the subject and the object; where there is neither a beyond (survival and death) nor an ‘on this side’ (the uncon- scious and the lost object); only an immediate, non-phantasmatic actualisation of symbolic reciprocity. This utopian idea is not fusional: only nostalgia engenders fusional utopias. There is no nostalgia here, nor is anything lost, separated or unconscious. Everything is already there, reversible and sacrificed. 165 Political Economy and Death Political Economy and Death We do not die because we must, we die because it is a habit, to which one day, not so long ago, our thoughts became bound. Raoul Vaneigem Den Göttern ist der Tod immer nur ein Vorurteil [To the Gods, death is only ever a prejudice.] F.W. Nietzsche As a universal of the human condition, death exists only when society dis- criminates against the dead. The institution of death, like that of the afterlife and immortality, is a recent victory for the political rationalism of castes, priests and the Church: their power is based on the management of the imaginary sphere of death. As regards the disappearance of the religious afterlife, it is the even more recent victory for the State’s political rationality. When the afterlife fades in the face of the advances made by ‘materialist’ reason, it is quite simply because it has crossed over into life itself. The power of the State is based on the management of life as the objective afterlife. In this, it is more powerful than the Church, since the abstract power of the State is increased not by an imaginary beyond, but by the imaginary of life itself. It relies on secularised death, the transcendence of the social, and its force derives from the mortal abstraction it embodies. Just as medicine is the management of the corpse, so the State is the management of the dead body of the socius. From the start, the Church was established on the bipartition of survival, or the afterlife, from life, the earthly world and the Kingdom of Heaven. It kept a jealous watch over this partition, for if the distance disappeared, its power would be at an end. The Church lives in the deferred eternity (as the State lives in deferred society, as revolutionaries live in the deferred revolu- tion: all are living in death) that it had so much trouble imposing. All primitive Christianity, and later popular, messianic and heretical Christianity, lived in the hope of parousia, in the necessity of the immediate realisation of the Kingdom of God (cf. W.E. Mühlmann, Les Messianismes révolution- naires [tr. J.B., 1968]). The mad Christians did not at first believe in a heaven and hell in the beyond: their vision implied the pure and simple resolution of death in the collective will for immediate eternity. The great Manichean heresies that threatened the foundations of the Church hold the same prin- ciple since they interpret this world as an antagonistic duality, a here and a there, of the principles of good and evil; impiously, they bring heaven and hell down to earth. For having effaced the glaze of the beyond they were ferociously suppressed, as were the spiritualist heretics of the St Francis of Assisi or the Joachim of Fiore type, whose radical charity amounted to estab- lishing a total community on this earth and thus sparing the Last Judgement. The Cathars also set their sights a little too much on achieved perfection in the inseparability of body and soul, the immanence of salvation in collective faith, which made a joke of the Church’s power of death. Throughout its Symbolic Exchange and Death166 history, the Church has had to dismantle the primitive community which had a tendency to seek salvation in the intense reciprocity with which it was shot through and on which it drew for its own energy. Against the abstract universality of God and the Church, sects and communities practised the ‘self-management’ of salvation, which then consisted in the group’s sym- bolic exaltation, finally turning into a deadly vertigo. The Church’s sole condition of possibility is the incessant elimination of this symbolic demand. This is also the State’s sole condition of possibility. At this point political economy enters the arena. To counter the dazzling sight of earthly communities, the Church imposes a political economy of individual salvation. First through faith (which became the soul’s personal relation to God instead of the effervescent community), then through the accumulation of works and merits, that is, an economy in the strict sense of the term, with its final account and its equivalences. It is then, as always since the appearance of processes of accumulation,19 that death really arose at the horizon of life. It is then that the Kingdom really passes to the other side of death, before which everyone finds themselves alone once again. Wherever it goes, Christianity trails with it the fascination with suffer- ing, solitude and death involved in the destruction of archaic communities. In the completed form of the religious universal, as in the economic (capital), everyone finds themselves alone again. With the sixteenth century, the modern figure of death was generalised. The Counter-Reformation, the funereal and obsessional games of the Baroque, and especially Protestantism, by individualising conscience before God and disinvesting collective ceremonials, brought about the progress of the individual’s anguish of death. It also gave rise to the immense modern enterprise of staving off death: the ethics of accumulation and material production, sacralisation through investment, the labour and profit collec- tively called the ‘spirit of capitalism’ (Max Weber, The Protestant Work Ethic [tr. T. Parsons, London: Routledge, 1992]) constructed a salvation-machine from which intra-worldly ascesis is little by little withdrawn in the interests of worldly and productive accumulation, without changing the aim of pro- tecting itself against death. With the turn of the sixteenth century, the vision and iconography of death in the Middle Ages was still folkloric and joyous. There is a collective theatre of death, which was not yet buried in individual consciousness (nor, as later, in the unconscious). In the fifteenth century, death also inspired the great messianic and egalitarian festival of the Dance of Death: kings, bish- ops, princes, townsfolk and villagers are all equal in the face of death, by way of a challenge to the unequal order of birth, wealth and power. This was the last great movement that Death was able to appear as an offensive myth, and as collective speech, since, as we know, death has become an individual, tragic20 thought ‘of the law [de droite]’, a ‘reactionary’ thought as regards revolt and social revolutionary movements. Our death was really born in the sixteenth century. It has lost its scythe and its clock, it has lost the Apocalyptic Horsemen and the grotesque and 167 Political Economy and Death macabre plays of the Middle Ages. Again, all this came from folklore and festival, in which death was still exchanged, not of course with the primi- tives’ ‘symbolic efficacy’, but at least as the collective phantasm on cathedral pediments and in the divided operations of hell. We could even say that pleasure is possible insofar as there is a hell. Its disappearence from the imaginary is only the sign of its psychological interiorisation; death ceases to be the Grim Reaper, and becomes an anguish concerning death. More subtle and more scientific generations of priests and sorcerers will flourish on this psychological hell. With the disintegration of traditional Christian and feudal communities through bourgeois Reason and the nascent system of political economy, death is no longer divided. It is cast in the image of the material goods which, as in previous exchanges, begin to circulate less between inseparable partners (it is always more or less a community or a clan who exchange), and increasingly under the sign of a general equivalent. In the capitalist mode, everyone is alone before the general equivalent. It is no coincidence that, in the same way, everyone finds themselves alone before death, since death is general equivalence. From this point on the obsession with death and the will to abolish death through accumulation become the fundamental motor of the rationality of political economy. Value, in particular time as value, is accumulated in the phantasm of death deferred, pending the term of a linear infinity of value. Even those who no longer believe in a personal eternity believe in the infin- ity of time as they do in a species-capital of double-compound interests. The infinity of capital passes into the infinity of time, the eternity of a productive system no longer familiar with the reversibility of gift-exchange, but instead with the irreversibility of quantitative growth. The accumula- tion of time imposes the idea of progress, as the accumulation of science imposes the idea of truth: in each case, what is accumulated is no longer symbolically exchanged, but becomes an objective dimension. Ultimately, the total objectivity of time, like total accumulation, is the total impossibil- ity of symbolic exchange, that is, death. Hence the absolute impasse of political economy, which intends to eliminate death through accumulation: the time of accumulation is the time of death itself. We cannot hope for a dialectical revolution at the end of this process of spiralling hoarding. We already know that the economic rationalisation of exchange (the market) is the social form which produces scarcity (Marshall Sahlins, ‘The original affluent society’, in Stone Age Economics [Chicago: Aldine and Atherton, 1972]). Similarly, the infinite accumulation of time as value under the sign of general equivalence entails the absolute scarcity of time that is death. A contradiction in capitalism? No, communism in this instance is in sol- idarity with political economy, since, in accordance with the same fantastic schema of an eternal accumulation of productive forces, communism too aims for the abolition of death. Only its total ignorance of death (save per- haps as a hostile horizon to be conquered by science and technics) has Symbolic Exchange and Death168 protected it up to now from the worst contradictions. For nothing can will the abolition of the law of value if you want to abolish death, that is, to preserve life as absolute value, at the same time. Life itself must leave the law of value and achieve a successful exchange against death. The materi- alists, with their idealistic life expurgated of death, a life ‘free’ at last of all ambivalence, hardly trouble themselves with this.21 Our whole culture is just one huge effort to dissociate life and death, to ward off the ambivalence of death in the interests of life as value, and time as the general equivalent. The elimination of death is our phantasm, and ramifies in every direction: for religion, the afterlife and immortality; for science, truth; and for economics, productivity and accumulation. No other culture had this distinctive opposition of life and death in the interests of life as positivity: life as accumulation, death as due payment. No other culture had this impasse: as soon as the ambivalence of life and death and the symbolic reversibility of death comes to an end, we enter into a process of accumulation of life as value; but by the same token, we also enter the field of the equivalent production of death. So life-become-value is constantly perverted by the equivalent death. Death, at the same instant, becomes the object of a perverse desire. Desire invests the very separation of life and death. This is the only way that we can speak of a death-drive. This is the only way we can speak of the unconscious, for the unconscious is only the accu- mulation of equivalent death, the death that is no longer exchanged and can only be cashed out in the phantasm. The symbolic is the inverse dream of an end of accumulation and a possible reversibility of death in exchange. Symbolic death, which has not undergone the imaginary disjunction of life and death which is at the origin of the reality of death, is exchanged in a social ritual of feasting. Imaginary-real death (our own) can only be redeemed through the individual work of mourning, which the subject carries out over the death of others and over himself from the start of his own life. This work of mourning has fuelled Western metaphysics of death since Christianity, even in the metaphysical concept of the death drive. The Death Drive With Freud we pass from philosophical death and the drama of consciousness to death as a pulsional process inscribed in the unconscious order; from a metaphysics of anguish to a metaphysics of the pulsion. It’s just as if death, liberated from the subject, at last gained its status as an objective finality: the pulsional energy of death or the principle of psychical functioning. Death, by becoming a pulsion, does not cease to be a finality (it is even the only end from this standpoint: the proposition of the death drive signifies an extraordinary simplification of finalities, since even Eros is subordinate to it), but this finality sinks, and is inscribed in the unconscious. Now this sink- ing of death into the unconscious coincides with the sinking of the dominant 169 Political Economy and Death system: death becomes simultaneously a ‘principle of psychical functioning’ and the ‘reality principle’ of our social formations, through the immense repressive mobilisation of labour and production. In other words, with the death drive, Freud installs the process of repetition at the core of objective determinations, at the very moment when the general system of production passes into pure and simple reproduction. This coincidence is extraordinary, since we are much more interested in a genealogy of the concept of the death drive than in its metaphysical status. Is the death drive an anthropological ‘discovery’ which supplants all the others (and which can from now on pro- vide a universal explanatory principle: we can imagine political economy entirely governed and engendered by the death drive), or is it produced at a given moment in relation to a particular configuration of the system? In this case, its radical nature is simply the radical nature of the system itself, and the concept merely sanctions a culture of death by giving it the label of a trans-historical pulsion. This operation is characteristic of all idealist thought, but we refuse to admit this with Freud. With Freud (as with Marx), Western reason will stop rationalising and idealising its own principles, it will even stop idealising reality through its critical effect of ‘objectivity’. Ultimately, reality will designate unsurpassable pulsional or economic structures: thus the death drive as the eternal process of desire. But how is it that this propo- sition is itself not a matter of a secondary elaboration? It is true that, at first, the death drive breaks with Western thought. From Christianity to Marxism and existentialism: either death is openly denied and sublimated, or it is dialecticised. In Marxist theory and practice, death is already conquered in the being of the class, or it is integrated as historical negativity. In more general terms, the whole Western practice of the domination of nature and the sublimation of aggression in production and accumulation is characterised as constructive Eros: Eros makes use of sublimated aggression for its own ends and, in the movement of becoming (this applies just as much to political economy), death is distilled as nega- tivity into homeopathic doses. Not even the modern philosophies of ‘being-towards-death’ reverse this tendency: here death serves as a tragic haunting of the subject, sealing its absurd liberty. 22 In Freud it is quite another matter. A dialectic with the death drive is no longer possible; there is no longer any sublimation, even if it is tragic. For the first time, death appeared as an indestructible principle, in opposition to Eros. The subject, class and history are irrelevant in this regard: the irreducible duality of the two pulsions, Eros and Thanatos, rewakens the ancient Manichean version of the world, the endless antagonism of the twin princi- ples of good and evil. This very powerful vision comes from the ancient cults where the basic intuition of a specificity of evil and death was still strong. This was unbearable to the Church, who will take centuries to exterminate it and impose the pre-eminent principle of the Good (God), reducing evil and death to a negative principle, dialectically subordinate to the other (the Devil). But there is always the nightmare of Lucifer’s autonomy, the Archangel of Evil (in all their forms, as popular heresies and superstitions Symbolic Exchange and Death170 that always have a tendency to take the existence of a principle of evil liter- ally and hence to form cults around it, even including black magic and Jansenist theory, not to mention the Cathars), which will haunt the Church day and night. It opposes the dialectic as an institutional theory and as a deterrent to a radical, dualistic and Manichean concept of death. History will bring victory to the Church and the dialectic (including the ‘materialist’ dialectic). In this sense, Freud breaks quite profoundly with Christian and Western metaphysics. The duality of the life and death instincts corresponds more precisely to Freud’s position in Beyond the Pleasure Principle. In Civilisation and its Discontents, the duality completes itself in a cycle dominated solely by the death drive. Eros is nothing but an immense detour taken by culture towards death, which subordinates everything to its own ends. But this last version does not, however, revert to an inverted dialectic between the two terms of the duality, since dialectics can only be the constructive becoming of Eros, whose goal is ‘to establish ever larger unities and to bind and regu- late energies’. Two principal characteristics oppose the death drive to this: 1. It dissolves assemblages, unbinds energy and undoes Eros’s organic dis- course by returning things to an inorganic, ungebunden, state, in a cer- tain sense, to utopia as opposed to the articulate and constructive topics of Eros. Entropy of death, negentropy of Eros. 2. This power of disintegration, disarticulation and defection implies a radical counter-finality in the form of an involution towards the prior, inorganic state. The compulsion to repeat (Wiederholungszwang), or the ‘tendency to reproduce and revive even those past events that involve no satisfaction whatsoever’, is primarily, for every living being, the ten- dency to reproduce the non-event of a prior inorganic state of things, that is to say, death. It is thus always as a repetitive cycle that death comes to dismantle the constructive, linear or dialectical finalities of Eros. The viscosity of the death drive and the elasticity of the inorganic is everywhere victorious in its resistance to the structuration of life. In the proposed death drive therefore, whether in its duel form or in the incessant and destructive counter-finality of repetition, there is something irreducible to all the intellectual apparatuses of Western thought. Freud’s thought acts fundamentally as the death drive in the Western theoretical uni- verse. But then, of course, it is absurd to give it the constructive status of ‘truth’: the ‘reality’ of the death instinct is indefensible; to remain faithful to the intuition of the death drive, it must remain a deconstructive hypoth- esis, that is, it must be adopted solely within the limits of the deconstruction that it carries out on all prior thought. As a concept, however, it too must be immediately deconstructed. We cannot think (other than as the ultimate subterfuge of reason) that the principle of deconstruction is all that escapes it. The death drive must be defended against every attempt to redialecticise it into a new constructive edifice. Marcuse is a good example of this. Concerning repression through death, he writes: ‘Theology and philosophy 171 Political Economy and Death today compete with each other in celebrating death as an existential cate- gory. Perverting[!] a biological fact into an ontological essence, they bestow transcendental blessing on the guilt of mankind which they help to perpet- uate’ (Eros and Civilisation[London: Sphere, 1970], p. 188). Thus it is for ‘surplus-repression’. As for fundamental repression: The brute fact of death denies once and for all the reality of a non-repressive existence. For death is the final negativity of time, but ‘joy wants eternity’. … Time has no power over the Id, the original domain of the pleasure principle. But the Ego, through which alone pleasure becomes real, is in its entirety sub- ject to time. The mere anticipation of the inevitable end, present in every instant, introduces a repressive element into all libidinal relations. (ibid., p. 185) We will overlook the ‘brute fact of death’: it is never a brute fact, only a social relation is repressive. What is most curious is the way in which death’s primal repression exchanges signs with the ‘liberation’ of Eros: The death instinct operates under the Nirvana principle: it tends towards … a state without want. This trend of this instinct implies that its destructive manifestations would be minimised as it approached such a state. If the instinct’s basic objective is not the termination of life but of pain – the absence of tension –then paradoxically, in terms of the instinct, the conflict between life and death is the more reduced, the closer life approximates the state of gratification. … Eros, freed from surplus-repression, would be strengthened, and the strengthened Eros would, as it were, absorb the objec- tive of the death instinct. The instinctual value of death would have changed. (ibid., p. 187, J.B.’s emphasis) Thus we will be able to change the instinct and triumph over the brute fact, in accordance with good old idealist philosophy of freedom and necessity: Death can become a token of freedom. The necessity of death does not refute the possibility of final liberation. Like the other necessities, it can be made rational – painless. (ibid., p. 188) The Marcusean dialectic therefore implies the total restoration of the death drive (in Eros and Civilisation, however, this passage is immediately fol- lowed by the ‘Critique of Neo-Freudian Revisionism’!), thus limiting the resistances this concept provokes in pious souls. Here again, it is not too much for dialectics – the ‘liberation’ of Eros in this instance; in others the ‘liberation’ of the forces of production – to bring about the end of death. The death drive is irritating, because it does not allow of any dialectical recovery. This is where its radicalism lies. But the panic it provokes does not confer the status of truth on it: we must wonder if, in the final instance, it is not itself a rationalisation of death. This is first of all the conviction that we hear in Freud (elsewhere he will talk of a speculative hypothesis): The dominating tendency of mental life … is the effort to reduce, to keep constant or to remove internal tension due to stimuli (the ‘Nirvana principle’, to borrow a term from Barbara Low) … [which] is one of our strongest rea- sons for believing in the existence of death instincts. (‘Beyond the pleasure principle’, in Standard Edition, Vol. 18, 1955, pp. 55–6) Symbolic Exchange and Death172 Why, then, all Freud’s efforts to ground the death instinct in biological rationality (Weissmann’s analysis, etc.)? This positivist effort is generally deplored, a little like Engels’ attempt to dialecticise Nature that we agree to ignore out of affection for him. However: If we are to take it as a truth that knows no exception that everything living dies for internal reasons – becomes inorganic once again – then we shall be compelled to say that ‘the aim of all life is death’ and, looking backwards, that ‘inanimate things existed before living ones’. … Thus these guardians of life [instincts], too, were originally the myrmidons of death. (ibid., p. 38) It is difficult to rid the death drive of positivism here in order to turn it into a ‘speculative hypothesis’ or ‘purely and simply a principle of psychical functioning’ (J.B. Pontalis, L’Arc, 34, 1968). Moreover, at this level there is no longer any real pulsional duality: death alone is finality. But it is this final- ity that in turn poses a crucial problem, since it inscribes death as anterior, as psychical and organic destiny, almost like programming or genetic code, in short, as a positivity that, unless we believe in the scientific reality of this pulsion, we can only take it as a myth. We can only set Freud against what he himself says: The theory of the drives is so to say our mythology. Drives are mythical enti- ties, magnificent in their indefiniteness. (‘New introductory lectures’, in Standard Edition, Vol. 22, 1964, p. 95) If the death drive is a myth, then this is how we will interpret it. We will interpret the death drive, and the concept of the unconscious itself, as myths, and no longer take account of their effects or their efforts at ‘truth’. A myth recounts something: not so much in the content as in the form of its discourse. Let’s make a bet that, under the metaphoric species of sexuality and death, psychoanalysis tells us something concerning the fundamental organisation of our culture, that when the myth is no longer told, when it establishes its fables as axioms, it loses the ‘magnificent indefiniteness’ that Freud spoke of. ‘The concept is only the residue of a metaphor’, as Nietzsche said. Let’s bet then on the metaphor of the unconscious, on the metaphor of the death drive. Eros in the service of death, all cultural sublimation as a long detour to death, the death drive nourishing repressive violence and presiding over culture like a ferocious super-ego, the forces of life inscribed in the compul- sion to repeat; all this is true, but true of our culture. Death undertakes to abolish death and, for this very purpose, erects death above death and is haunted by it as its own end. The term ‘pulsion’ or ‘drive’ is stated meta- phorically, designating the contemporary phase of the political-economic system (does it then remain political economy?) where the law of value, in its most terroristic structural form, reaches completion in the pure and simple compulsive reproduction of the code, where the law of value appears to be a finality as irreversible as a pulsion, so that it takes on the figure of a destiny for our culture. Stage of the immanent repetition of one and the same law, insisting on its own end, caught, totally invested by death 173 Political Economy and Death as objective finality, and total subversion by the death drive as a deconstruc- tive process – the metaphor of the death drive says all of this simultaneously, for the death drive is at the same time the system and the system’s double, its doubling into a radical counter-finality (see the Double, and its ‘worrying strangeness’, das Unheimliche). This is what the myth recounts. But let’s see what happens when it sets itself up as the objective discourse of the ‘pulsion’. With the term ‘pulsion’, which has both a biological and a psychical definition, psychoanalysis set- tles down into categories that come straight from the imaginary of a certain Western reason: far from radically contradicting this latter, it must then interpret itself as a moment of Western thought. As for the biological, it is clear that scientific rationality produces the distinction of the living and the non-living on which biology is based. Science, producing itself as a code, on the one hand literally produces the dead, the non-living, as a conceptual object, and, on the other, produces the separation of the dead as an axiom from which science can be legitimated. The only good (scientific) object, just like the only good Indian, is a dead one. Now it is this inorganic state to which the death drive is oriented, to the non-living status that only comes about through the arbitrary decrees of science and, when all’s said and done, through its own phantasm of repression and death. Ultimately, being nothing but the cyclical repetition of the non-living, the death drive contributes to biology’s arbitrariness, doubling it through a psychoanalytic route. But not every culture produces a separate concept of the non-living; only our culture produces it, under the sign of biology. Thus, suspending the discrimination would be enough to invalidate the concept of the death drive, which is ultimately only a theoretical agreement between the living and the dead, with the sole result that science loses its footing amongst all the attempts at articulation. The non-living is always permanently sweeping science along into the axiomatics of a system of death (see J. Monod, Chance and Necessity [tr. Austyn Wainhouse, London: Collins, 1970]). The problem is the same as regards the psychical, putting the whole of psychoanalysis into question. We must ask ourselves when and why our system began to produce the ‘psychical’. The psychical has only recently become autonomous, doubling biology’s autonomy at a higher level. This time the line passes between the organic, the somatic and ‘something else’. There is nothing psychical save on the basis of this distinction. Hence the ensuing insoluble difficulty of linking the two parts together again; the precise result of this is the concept of the pulsion, which is intended to form a bridge between the two, but which merely contributes to the arbi- trariness of each. Here the metapsychology of the pulsion reverts to mind–body metaphysics, rewriting it at a more advanced stage. The separated order of the psychical results from our precipitate desire, in our (conscious or unconscious) ‘heart of hearts’, for everything that the system prohibits from collective and symbolic exchange: it is an order of the repressed. It is hardly astonishing that this order is governed by the death drive, since it is nothing but the precipitate individual of an order of death. Symbolic Exchange and Death174 Psychoanalysis, like every other discipline, theorises the death drive as such within its own order, and so merely sanctions this mortal discrimination. Conscious, unconscious, super-ego, guilt, repression, primary and second- ary processes, phantasm, neurosis and psychosis: yes, all this works very well if we consent to the circumscription of the psychical as such, which circum- scription produces our system (not just any system) as the immediate and fundamental form of intelligibility, that is to say, as code. The omnipotence of the code is precisely the inscription of separate spheres, which then jus- tifies a specialised investigation and a sovereign science; but it is undoubtedly the psychical that has the best future. All the savage, errant, transversal and symbolic processes will be inscribed and domesticated within it, in the name of the unconscious itself, which, like an unexpected joke, is generally consid- ered today as the leitmotiv of radical ‘liberation’! Death itself will be domesticated under the sign of the death drive! In fact the death drive must be interpreted against Freud and psychoanal- ysis if we wish to retain its radicality. The death drive must be understood as acting against the scientific positivity of the psychoanalytic apparatus as developed by Freud. The death drive is not just the limit of psychoanalysis’s formulations nor its most radical conclusion, it is its reversal, and those who have rejected the concept of the death drive have, in a certain sense, a more accurate view than those who take it, as even Freud himself did, in their psychoanalytic stride without, perhaps, understanding what he had said. The death drive effectively goes far beyond all previous points of view and ren- ders all previous apparatuses, whether economic, energetic, topological or even the psychical apparatus itself, useless. All the more reason, of course, for the pulsional logic it draws on, inherited from the scientific mythology of the nineteenth century. Perhaps Lacan guessed this when he spoke of the ‘irony’ of the concept of the death drive, of the unheard of and insoluble paradox that it poses. Historically, psychoanalysis has taken the view that this is its strangest offspring, but death does not allow itself to be caught in the mirror of psychoanalysis. It acts as a total, radical, functional principle, and has no need of the mirror, repression, nor even a libidinal economy. It merely meanders through successive topologies and energetic calculi, ulti- mately forming the economics of the unconscious itself, denouncing all that as well as Eros’s positive machinery, as the positive interpreting machine that it disrupts and dismantles like any other. A principle of counter-finality, a radical speculative hypothesis, meta-economic, metapsychical, meta-energetic, metapsychoanalytic, the death (drive) is beyond the unconscious: it must be wrested from psychoanalysis and turned against it. Death in Bataille Despite its radicality, the psychoanalytic vision of death remains an insuffi- cient vision: the pulsions are constrained by repetition, its perspective bears on a final equilibrium within the inorganic continuum, eliminating differences 175 Political Economy and Death and intensities following an involution towards the lowest point; an entropy of death, pulsional conservatism, equilibrium in the absence of Nirvana. This theory manifests certain affinities with Malthusian political economy, the objective of which is to protect oneself against death. For political economy only exists by default: death is its blind spot, the absence haunting all its calculations. And the absence of death alone permits the exchange of values and the play of equivalences. An infinitesimal injection of death would immedi- ately create such excess and ambivalence that the play of value would completely collapse. Political economy is an economy of death, because it economises on death and buries it under its discourse. The death drive falls into the opposite category: it is the discourse of death as the insurmountable finality. This dis- course is oppositional but complementary, for if political economy is indeed Nirvana (the infinite accumulation and reproduction of dead value), then the death drive denounces its truth, at the same time as subjecting it to absolute derision. It does this, however, in the terms of the system itself, by idealising death as a drive (as an objective finality). As such, the death drive is the cur- rent system’s most radical negative, but even it simply holds up a mirror to the funereal imaginary of political economy. Instead of establishing death as the regulator of tensions and an equilibrium function, as the economy of the pulsion, Bataille introduces it in the opposite sense, as the paroxysm of exchanges, superabundance and excess. Death as excess, always already there, proves that life is only defective when death has taken it hostage, that life only exists in bursts and in exchanges with death, if it is not condemned to the discontinuity of value and therefore to absolute deficit. ‘To will that there be life only is to make sure that there is only death.’ The idea that death is not at all a breakdown of life, that it is willed by life itself, and that the delirial (economic) phantasm of eliminating it is equivalent to implanting it in the heart of life itself – this time as an endless mournful nothingness. Biologically, ‘[t]he idea of a world where human life might be artificially prolonged has a nightmare quality about it’ (G. Bataille, Eroticism [2nd edn, tr. M. Dalwood, London: Marion Boyars, 1987], p. 101), but sym- bolically above all; and here the nightmare is no longer a simple possibility, but the reality we live at every instant: death (excess, ambivalence, gift, sacrifice, expenditure and the paroxysm), and so real life is absent from it. We renounce dying and accumulate instead of losing ourselves: Not only do we renounce death, but also we let our desire, which is really the desire to die, lay hold of its object and we keep it while we live on. We enrich our life instead of losing it. (Eroticism, p. 142) Here, luxury and prodigality predominate over functional calculation, just as death predominates over life as the unilateral finality of production and accumulation: On a comprehensive view, human life strives towards prodigality to the point of anguish, to the point where the anguish becomes unbearable. The rest is mere moralising chatter. … A febrile unrest within us asks death to wreak its havoc at our expense. (ibid., p. 60) Symbolic Exchange and Death176 Death and sexuality, instead of confronting each other as antagonistic principles (Freud), are exchanged in the same cycle, in the same cyclical revolution of continuity. Death is not the ‘price’ of sexuality – the sort of equivalence one finds in every theory of complex living beings (the infu- sorium is itself immortal and asexual) – nor is sexuality a simple detour on the way to death, as in Civilisation and its Discontents: they exchange their energies and excite each other. Neither has its own specific economy: life and death only fall under the sway of a single economy if they are separated; once they are mixed, they pass beyond economics altogether, into festivity and loss (eroticism according to Bataille): [W]e can no longer differentiate between sexuality and death[, which] are simply the culminating points of the festival nature celebrates, with the inex- haustible multitude of living beings, both of them signifying the boundless wastage of nature’s resources as opposed to the urge to live on characteristic of every living creature. (Eroticism, p. 61) This festivity takes place because it reinstates the cycle where penury imposes the linear economy of duration, because it reinstates a cyclical revolution of life and death where Freud augurs no other issue than the repetitive involution of death. In Bataille, then, there is a vision of death as a principle of excess and an anti-economy. Hence the metaphor of luxury and the luxurious character of death. Only sumptuous and useless expenditure has meaning; the econ- omy has no meaning, it is only a residue that has been made into the law of life, whereas wealth lies in the luxurious exchange of death: sacrifice, the ‘accursed share’, escaping investment and equivalence, can only be annihi- lated. If life is only a need to survive at any cost, then annihilation is a priceless luxury. In a system where life is ruled by value and utility, death becomes a useless luxury, and the only alternative. In Bataille, this luxurious conjunction of sex and death figures under the sign of continuity, in opposition to the discontinuous economy of individual existences. Finality belongs in the discontinuous order, where discontinuous beings secrete finality, all sorts of finalities, which amount to only one: their own death. We are discontinuous beings, individuals who perish in isolation in the midst of an incomprehensible adventure, but we yearn for our lost continuity. (Eroticism, p. 15) Death itself is without finalities; in eroticism, the finality of the individual being is put back into question: What does physical eroticism signify if not a violation of the very being of its practitioners …? The whole business of eroticism is to destroy the self-contained character of the participants as they are in their normal lives. (ibid., p. 17) Erotic nakedness is equal to death insofar as it inaugurates a state of com- munication, loss of identity and fusion. The fascination of the dissolution of 177 Political Economy and Death constituted forms: such is Eros (pace Freud, for whom Eros binds energies, federates them into ever larger unities). In death, as in Eros, it is a matter of introducing all possible continuity into discontinuity, a game of complete continuity. It is in this sense that ‘death, the rupture of the discontinuous individualities to which we cleave in terror, stands there before us more real than life itself’ (ibid., p. 19). Freud says exactly the same thing, but by default. It is no longer a question of the same death. What Freud missed was not seeing the curvature of life in death, he missed its vertigo and its excess, its reversal of the entire economy of life, making it, in the form of a final pulsion, into a belated equation of life. Freud stated life’s final economy under the sign of repetition and missed its paroxysm. Death is neither resolution nor involution, but a reversal and a symbolic challenge. For once they travel down their allotted paths With open eyes, self-oblivious, too ready to Comply with what the gods have wished them, Only too gladly will mortal beings Speed back into the All by the shortest way; So rivers plunge – not movement, but rest they seek, Drawn on, pulled down against their will from Boulder to boulder – abandoned, helmless – By that mysterious yearning toward the chasm; Chaotic deeps attract, and whole peoples too May come to long for death [By Xanthos once, in Grecian times, there stood The town] The kindness of Brutus provoked them. For When fire broke out, most nobly he offered them His help, although he led those troops which Stood at their gates to besiege the township Yet from the walls they threw all the servants down Whom he had sent. Much livelier then at once The fire flared up, and they rejoiced, and Brutus extended his arms towards them, All were beside themselves. And great crying there, Great jubilation sounded. Then into flames Leapt man and woman; boys came hurtling Down from the roofs or their fathers stabbed them. It is not wise to fight against heroes. But Events long prepared it. Their ancestors When they were quite encircled once and Strongly the Persian forces pressed them, Took rushes from the rivers and, that their foes Might find a desert there, set ablaze the town; And house and temple – breathed to holy Aether – and men did the flame carry off there. So their descendants heard … (Hölderlin, ‘Voice of the people’ [2nd version, in Friedrich Hölderlin: Poems and Fragments, tr. and ed. Michael Hamburger, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966, pp. 178–83]) The proposition according to which life and death are exchanged, and exchanged at the highest price with death, no longer belongs to the order of scientific truth, since it is a ‘truth’ that science is forever forbidden. Symbolic Exchange and Death178 If the union of two lovers comes about through love, it involves the idea of death, murder or suicide … [a] continuous violation of discontinuous individuality … the orifices, gulfs and abysses whereby beings are absorbed into continuity, somehow assimilates it to death. (Bataille, Eroticism, pp. 21ff) When Bataille says this, concerning eroticism, there is no objective relation, no law, and no natural necessity in any of this. Luxury and excess are not functions, they are inscribed neither in the body nor in the world. Nor on the other hand is death – sumptuous, symbolic death, which belongs to the order of the challenge – inscribed in a body or a nature any longer. The symbolic can never be confused with the real or with science. But even Bataille commits the following error: The desire to produce at cut prices is niggardly and human. Nature, for its part, is boundlessly prodigious, and ‘sacrifices’ in good spirits. (ibid., p. 60) Why seek the security of an ideally prodigious nature, as opposed to the economists’ ideally circulating nature? Luxury is no more ‘natural’ than economics. Sacrifice and sacrificial expenditure are not of the order of things. This error leads Bataille to confuse reproductive sexuality with erotic expenditure: The excess from which reproduction springs can only be understood with the aid of the excess of death, and vice-versa. (ibid., p. 101) But reproduction as such has no excess – even if it implies the individual’s death, it is still a matter of a positive economy and a functional death – from which the species might benefit. Sacrificial death, however, is anti-productive and anti-reproductive. It is true that it aims at continuity, as Bataille says, but not that of the species, which is only the continuity of an order of life, whereas the radical continuity in which the subject is ruined by sex and death always signifies the fabulous loss of an order. It is no more supported by the reproductive act than desire is supported by need, no more than sumptuary expenditure prolongs the satisfaction of needs: this biological functionalism is annihilated in eroticism. To look for the secret of sacrifice, sacrificial destruction, play and expenditure in the law of the species, is to reduce it all to a functionalism. There is not even a contiguity between sacrifice and the law of the species. Erotic excess and the reproductive sexual function have nothing in common. The symbolic excess of death has nothing in common with the body’s biological losses. 23 Bataille, here, labours the influence of the temptation of naturalism, if not biologism, leading him, conversely, to naturalise a tendency to disconti- nuity: ‘The urge to live on characteristic of every living creature’ (ibid., p. 61). The ‘living creature’ protects itself against the living energies of a debauched nature, an orgy of annihilation by means of prohibitions, resist- ing the excess of the death drive that comes from nature by every available means (its resistance, however, is only ever provisional: ‘Men have never definitively said no to violence and death’ – ibid., p. 62). 179 Political Economy and Death Thus, on the basis of a natural definition of expenditure (nature as the model of prodigality) and a substantial and ontological definition of eco- nomics (the subject wishes to live on in his being – but where does this basic desire come from?), Bataille sets up a kind of subjective dialectic of prohibition and transgression, where the initially high-spirited character of sacrifice and death is lost in the delights of Christianity and perversion;24 a kind of objective dialectic between continuity and discontinuity where the challenge posed by death to economic organisation is effaced in the face of a great metaphysical alternation. Nevertheless, something remains in Bataille’s excessive and luxuriant vision of death that removes it from psychoanalysis and its individual and psychical domain. This something provides the opportunity to disturb every economy, shattering not only the objective mirror of political econ- omy, but also the inverse psychical mirror of repression, the unconscious and libidinal economy. Beyond all mirrors, or in their fragments, shattered like those of the mirror where The Student of Prague rediscovered his real image at the moment of death, something appears for us today: a fantastic dispersal of the body, of being and wealth. Bataille’s figure of death is the closest premonition of this. My Death is Everywhere, my Death Dreams Punctual Death, Biological Death The irreversibility of biological death, its objective and punctual character, is a modern fact of science. It is specific to our culture. Every other culture says that death begins before death, that life goes on after life, and that it is impossible to distinguish life from death. Against the representation which sees in one the term of the other, we must try to see the radical indeterminacy of life and death, and the impossibility of their autonomy in the symbolic order. Death is not a due payment [échéance], it is a nuance of life; or, life is a nuance of death. But our modern idea of death is con- trolled by a very different system of representations: that of the machine and the function. A machine either works or it does not. Thus the biolog- ical machine is either dead or alive. The symbolic order is ignorant of this digital abstraction. And even biology acknowledges that we start dying at birth, but this remains with the category of a functional definition. 25 It is quite another thing to say that death articulates life, is exchanged with life and is the apogee of life: for then it becomes absurd to make life a process which expires with death, and more absurd still to make death equivalent to a deficit and an accelerated repayment. Neither life nor death can any longer be assigned a given end: there is therefore no punctuality nor any possible definition of death. We are living entirely within evolutionist thought, which states that we go from life to death: this is the illusion of the subject that sustains both biology and metaphysics (biology wishes to reverse metaphysics, but Symbolic Exchange and Death180 merely prolongs it). But there is no longer even a subject who dies at a given moment. It is more real to say that whole parts of ‘ourselves’ (of our bodies, our language) fall from life to death, while the living are subjected to the work of mourning. In this way, a few of the living manage to forget them gradually, as God managed to forget the drowned girl who was carried away by the stream of water in Brecht’s song: Und es geschah, dass Gott sie allmählich vergass, zuerst das Gesicht, dann die Hände, und zuletzt das Haar … [It happened (very slowly) that it gently slid from God’s thoughts: First her face, then her hands, and right at the end her hair.] [‘The Drowned Girl’ in Bertolt Brecht: Poems and Songs, ed. and tr. John Willett, London: Methuen, 1990, p. 14] The subject’s identity is continually falling apart, falling into God’s for- getting. But this death is not at all biological. At one pole, biochemistry, asexual protozoa are not affected by death, they divide and branch out (nor is the genetic code, for its part, ever affected by death: it is trans- mitted unchanged beyond individual fates). At the other, symbolic, pole, death and nothingness no longer exist, since in the symbolic, life and death are reversible. Only in the infinitesimal space of the individual conscious subject does death take on an irreversible meaning. Even here, death is not an event, but a myth experienced as anticipation. The subject needs a myth of its end, as of its origin, to form its identity. In reality, the subject is never there: like the face, the hands and the hair, and even before no doubt, it is always already somewhere else, trapped in a senseless distribution, an endless cycle impelled by death. This death, everywhere in life, must be conjured up and localised in a precise point of time and a precise place: the body. In biological death, death and the body neutralise instead of stimulating each other. The mind–body duality is biology’s fundamental presupposition. In a certain sense, this duality is death itself, since it objectifies the body as residual, as a bad object which takes its revenge by dying. It is according to the mind that the body becomes the brute, objective fact, fated for sex, anguish and death. It is according to the mind, this imaginary schizz, that the body becomes the ‘reality’ that exists only in being condemned to death. Therefore the mortal body is no more ‘real’ than the immortal soul: both result simultaneously from the same abstraction, and with them the two great complementary metaphysics: the idealism of the soul (with all its moral metamorphoses) and the ‘materialist’ idealism of the body, prolonged in biology. Biology lives on as much by the separation of mind and body as from any other Christian or Cartesian metaphysics, but it no longer declares this. The mind or soul is not mentioned any more: as an ideal principle, it has entirely passed into the moral discipline of science; into the legitimating principle of technical operations on the real and on the world; into the principles of an ‘objective’ materialism. In the Middle Ages, those who 181 Political Economy and Death practised the discourse of the mind or soul were closer to the ‘bodily signs’ (Octavio Paz, Conjunctions and Disjunctions [tr. Helen Lane, New York: Arcade, 1990]) than biological science, which, techniques and axioms, has passed entirely over to the side of the ‘non-body’. The Accident and the Catastrophe There is a paradox of modern bourgeois rationality concerning death. To conceive of it as natural, profane and irreversible constitutes the sign of the ‘Enlightenment’ and Reason, but enters into sharp contradiction with the principles of bourgeois rationality, with its individual values, the unlimited progress of science, and its mastery of nature in all things. Death, neu- tralised as a ‘natural fact’, gradually becomes a scandal. Octavio Paz has analysed this brilliantly in his theory of the Accident: Modern science has eliminated epidemics and has given us plausible explana- tions of other natural catastrophes: nature has ceased to be the depository of our guilt feelings; at the same time, technology has extended and widened the notion of accident and, what is more, it has given it an absolutely different character. … Accidents are part of our daily life and their shadow peoples our dreams. … The uncertainty principle in contemporary physics and Gödel’s proof in logic are the equivalent of the Accident in the historical world. … Axiomatic and deterministic systems have lost their consistency and revealed an inherent defect. But it is not really a defect: it is a property of the system, something that belongs to it as a system. The Accident is not an exception or a sickness of our political regimes; nor is it a correctable defect of our civili- sation: it is the natural consequence of our science, our politics and our morality. The Accident is part of our idea of progress. … The Accident has become a paradox of necessity: it possesses the fatality of necessity and at the same time the uncertainty of freedom. The non-body, transformed into a materialist science, is a synonym for terror: the Accident is one of the attrib- utes of reason that we adore. … Christian morality has given its powers of repression over to it, but at the same time this superhuman power has lost any pretension to morality. It is the return of the anguish of the Aztecs, with- out any celestial signs or presages. Catastrophe has become banal and laughable because in the final analysis the Accident is only an accident. (Conjunctions and Disjunctions, pp. 111–13) Just as society gives rise to madmen and anomalies at its peripheries in the process of normalisation so reason and the technical mastery of nature, as they become more entrenched, become surrounded by the catastrophic breakdown of the ‘inorganic body of nature’ they give rise to as unreason. This unreason is intolerable, since reason wants to be sovereign and can no longer even think of what escapes it; it is unresolvable since for us there are no longer any propitiating or reconciling rituals: the accident, like death, is absurd, that’s all there is to it. It is a piece of sabotage. An evil demon is there to make this beautiful machine always break down. Hence this rationalist cul- ture suffers, like no other, from a collective paranoia. Something or someone must have been responsible for the least accident, the slightest irregularity, the least catastrophe, an earth tremor, a house in ruins, bad weather; every- thing is an assassination attempt. Thus the new wave of sabotage, terrorism Symbolic Exchange and Death182 and banditism is less interesting than the fact that what happens is interpreted this way. Accident or not? Undecidable. Nor is it important, since the cat- egory of the Accident analysed by Octavio Paz has fallen under that of the assassination attempt. And this is normal in a rational system: since chance can only be left to a human will, every breakdown is interpreted as a curse, an evil spell, or, politically, as a breach of the social order.26 And it is true that a natural catastrophe is a danger to the established order, not only because of the real disorder it provokes, but by the blow it strikes to every sovereign ‘rationality’, politics included. Hence the state of siege for the earth tremor (Nicaragua), hence the police presence at the scenes of catastrophes (which, at the time of the Ermenonville DC–10 catastrophe, is more important than at a demonstration). For no-one knows to what extent the ‘death drive’, primed by the accident or the catastrophe, may be unleashed on this occasion and turn against the political order. It is remarkable that we have returned, in the heyday of the rational sys- tem and as a full logical consequence of this system, to the ‘primitive’ vision where we impute a hostile will to every event, and particularly to death. But it is ourselves and ourselves alone who are full primitives (which nickname we attach to the primitives in order to exorcise it). For the ‘primitives’ them- selves, this conception corresponded to the logic of their reciprocal and ambivalent exchanges involving everything around them; even natural catastrophes and death were easily intelligible through the categories of their social structures, whereas for us it is plainly paralogical. This is arational paranoia, the axioms of which give rise to an increasingly ubiquitous and absolute unintelligibility: death as unacceptable and insoluble, the Accident as persecution, as the absurd and spiteful resistance of a matter or a nature that will not abide by the ‘objective’ laws with which we have pursued it. Hence the ever increasing fascination with the catastrophe, the accident and the assassination attempt: reason itself is pursued by the hope of a universal revolt against its own norms and privileges. ‘Natural’ Death An ideal or standard form of death, ‘natural’ death, corresponds to the bio- logical definition of death and the rational logical will. This death is ‘normal’ since it comes ‘at life’s proper term’. Its very concept issues from the possi- bility of pushing back the limits of life: living becomes a process of accumu- lation, and science and technology start to play a role in this quantitative strategy. Science and technology do not manage to fulfil an original desire to live as long as possible; through the symbolic disintrication of death, life passes into life-capital (into a quantitative evaluation), which alone gives rise to a biomedical science and technology of prolonging life. Natural death therefore signifies not the acceptance of death within ‘the order of things’, but a systematic denegation of death. Natural death is subject to science, and death’s call is to be exterminated by science. This clearly signifies that death is inhuman, irrational and senseless, like untamed 183 Political Economy and Death nature (the Western concept of ‘nature’ is always the concept of a repressed or domesticated nature). The only good death is a death that has been defeated and subjected to the law: this is the ideal of natural death. It should be possible for everyone to reach the term of their biological ‘capital’, to enjoy life ‘to the end’ without violence or premature death. As if everyone had their own little print-out of a life-plan, their ‘normal expec- tation’ of life, basically a ‘contract of life’; hence the social demand for a quality of life that makes up part of a natural death. The new social con- tract: society as a whole, with its science and technology, becomes collectively responsible for the death of each individual. 27 This demand could moreover involve calling the existing order into question, as do quan- titative (wage) demands: to demand a just lifespan just as one demands just rewards for one’s labour power. Essentially, this right, like every other, con- ceals a repressive jurisdiction. Everyone has a right, but also a duty, to a natural death, for this death is characteristic of the system of political econ- omy, its typical obligation to die: 1. As a system of maximalisation of the forces of production (in an ‘extensive’ system of manpower, slaves have no natural death, they are made to work themselves to death); 2. More importantly, that everyone should have a right to their life (habeas corpus – habeas vitam) extends social jurisdiction over death. Death is socialised like everything else, and can no longer be anything but natural, since every other death is a social scandal: we have not done what is necessary. Is this social progress? No, it is rather the progress of the social, which even annexes death to itself. Everyone is dispossessed of their death, and will no longer be able to die as it is now understood. One will no longer be free to live as long as possible. Amongst other things, this signifies the ban on consuming one’s life without taking limits into account. In short, the principle of natural death is equivalent to the neutralisation of life.28 The same goes for the question of equality in death: life must be reduced to quantity (and death therefore to nothing) in order to adjust it to democracy and the law of equivalences. Old Age and Retirement: the ‘Third Age’ Here too, science’s conquest of death enters into contradiction with the system’s rationality: retirement becomes a dead weight on social self- management. An entire portion of social wealth (money and moral values) is sunk into it without being able to give it a meaning. A third of society is thus segregated and placed in a situation of economic parasitism. The lands conquered on this death march are socially barren. Recently colonised, old age in modern times burdens society with the same weight as colonised native populations used to. Retirement, or the ‘Third Age’, says precisely what it means: it is a sort of Third World. Old age has merely become a marginal and ultimately asocial slice of life – a ghetto, a reprieve and the slide into death. Old age is literally being Symbolic Exchange and Death184 eliminated. In proportion as the living live longer, as they ‘win’ over death, they cease to be symbolically acknowledged. Condemned to a forever receding death, this age group loses its status and its prerogatives. In other social formations, old age actually exists as the symbolic pivot of the group. In such societies, the status of the elderly, the perfected form of the ances- tor, is the most prestigious. ‘Years’ constitute real wealth which is exchanged for authority or power, instead of the situation today, where years ‘gained’ are only calculable accumulated years that have no capacity to be exchanged. Prolonged life expectancy has therefore simply ended up discriminating against old age, which follows logically from discriminating against death itself. Here again, the ‘social’ has worked well, making old age into a ‘social’ territory (which in journals appears under this rubric alongside immigrants and abortions), and socialising this part of life into an enclosure over itself. Under the ‘beneficent’ sign of natural death, it has been made into an early social death. Because the individual life of civilised man, placed into an infinite ‘progress’ according to its own immanent meaning should never come to an end; for there is a further step ahead of one who stands in the march of progress. And no man who comes to die stands upon the peak which lies in infinity. Abraham, or some peasants of the past, died ‘old and satiated with life’ because he stood in the organic cycle of life; because his life, in terms of its meaning and on the eve of his days, had given to him what life had to offer; because for him there remained no puzzles he might wish to solve; and there- fore he could have had ‘enough’ of life. Whereas civilised man, placed in the midst of the continuous enrichment of culture by ideas, knowledge and prob- lems, may become ‘tired of life’ but not ‘satiated by life’ … And because death is meaningless, civilised life as such is meaningless. (Max Weber, ‘Science as a Vocation’ [in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, tr. and ed. H.H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970], pp. 139–40) Natural Death and Sacrificial Death Why is it that today there are no expected and foreseen deaths from old age, a death in the family, the only death that had full meaning for the traditional collectivity, from Abraham to our grandfathers? It is no longer even touching, it is almost ridiculous, and socially insignificant in any case. Why on the other hand is it that violent, accidental, and chance death, which previous communities could not make any sense of (it was dreaded and cursed as vehemently as we curse suicide), has so much meaning for us: it is the only one that is generally talked about; it is fascinating and touches the imagination. Once again, ours is the culture of the Accident, as Octavio Paz says. Death is not abjectly exploited by the Media since they are happy to gamble on the fact that the only events of immediate, unmanipulated and straightforward significance for all are those which in one way or another bring death onto the scene. In this sense the most despicable media are also the most objective. And again, to interpret this in terms of repressed indi- vidual pulsions or unconscious sadism is trivial and uninteresting, since it is 185 Political Economy and Death a matter of a collective passion. Violent or catastrophic death does not satisfy the little individual unconscious, manipulated by the vile mass-media (this is a secondary revision, and is already morally weighted); this death moves us so profoundly only because it works on the group itself, and because in one way or another it transfigures and redeems in its own eyes. ‘Natural’ death is devoid of meaning because the group has no longer any role to play in it. It is banal because it is bound to the policed and commonplace [banalisé] individual subject, to the policed and common- place nuclear family, and because it is no longer a collective mourning and joy. Each buries his own dead. With the primitives, there is no ‘natural’ death: every death is social, public and collective, and it is always the effect of an adversarial will that the group must absorb (no biology). This absorp- tion takes place in feasting and rites. Feasting is the exchange of wills (we don’t see how feasting would reabsorb a biological event). Evil wills and expiation rites are exchanged over the death’s head. Death deceives and symbolically gains esteem; here death gains status, and the group is enriched by a partner. To us, the dead have just passed away and no longer have anything to exchange. The dead are residual even before dying. At the end of a life- time of accumulation, the dead are subtracted from the total in an economic operation. They do not become effigies: they serve entirely as alibis for the living and to their obvious superiority over the dead. This is a flat, one-dimensional death, the end of the biological journey, settling a credit: ‘giving in one’s soul’, like a tyre, a container emptied of its contents. What banality! All passion then takes refuge in violent death, which is the sole mani- festation of something like the sacrifice, that is to say, like a real transmutation through the will of the group. And in this sense, it matters little whether death is accidental, criminal or catastrophic: from the moment it escapes ‘natural’ reason, and becomes a challenge to nature, it once again becomes the business of the group, demanding a collective and symbolic response; in a word, it arouses the passion for the artificial, which is at the same time sacrificial passion. Nature is uninteresting and mean- ingless, but we need only ‘return’ one death to ‘nature’, we need only exchange it in accordance with strict conventional rites, for its energy (both the dead person’s energy and that of death itself) to affect the group, to be reabsorbed and expended by the group, instead of simply leaving it as a natural ‘residue’. We, for our part, no longer have an effective rite for reabsorbing death and its rupturing energies; there remains the phantasm of sacrifice, the violent artifice of death. Hence the intense and profoundly collective satisfaction of the automobile death. In the fatal accident, the artificiality of death fascinates us. Technical, non-natural and therefore willed (ultimately by the victim him- or herself), death becomes interest- ing once again since willed death has a meaning. This artificiality of death facilitates, on a par with the sacrifice, its aesthetic doubling in the imagina- tion, and the enjoyment that follows from it. Obviously ‘aesthetics’ only Symbolic Exchange and Death186 has a value for us since we are condemned to contemplation. The sacrifice is not ‘aesthetic’ for the primitives, but it always marks a refusal of natural and biological succession, an intervention of an initiatory order, a con- trolled and socially governed violence. These days, we can only rediscover this anti-natural violence in the chance accident or catastrophe, which we therefore experience as socially symbolic events of the highest importance, as sacrifices. Finally, the Accident is only accidental, that is to say, absurd, for official reason; for the symbolic demand, which we have never been without, the accident has always been something else altogether. Hostage-taking is always a matter of the same scenario. Unanimously condemned, it inspires profound terror and joy. It is also on the verge of becoming a political ritual of the first order at a time when politics is col- lapsing into indifference. The hostage has a symbolic yield a hundred times superior to that of the automobile death, which is itself a hundred times superior to natural death. This is because we rediscover here a time of the sacrifice, of the ritual of execution, in the immanence of the collectively expected death. This death, totally undeserved, therefore totally artificial, is therefore perfect from the sacrificial point of view, for which the offici- ating priest or ‘criminal’ is expected to die in return, according to the rules of a symbolic exchange to which we adhere so much more profoundly than we do to the economic order. The workplace accident is the concern of the economic order and has no symbolic yield whatsoever. Since it is a machinic breakdown rather than a sacrifice, it is as indifferent to the collective imagination as it is to the cap- italist entrepreneur. It is the object of a mechanical refusal, of a mechanical revolt, based on the right to life and to security, and is neither the object nor the cause of a ludic terror.29 Only the worker, as is well known, plays too freely with his security, at the whim of the unions and bosses who understand nothing of this challenge. We are all hostages, and that’s the secret of hostage-taking, and we are all dreaming, instead of dying stupidly working oneself to the ground, of receiving death and of giving death. Giving and receiving constitute one symbolic act (the symbolic act par excellence), which rids death of all the indifferent negativity it holds for us in the ‘natural’ order of capital. In the same way, our relations to objects are no longer living and mortal, but instrumental (we no longer know how to destroy them, and we no longer expect our own death), which is why they are really dead objects that end up killing us, in the same fashion as the workplace accident, however, just as one object crushes another. Only the automobile accident re-establishes some kind of sacrificial equilibrium. For death is something that is shared out, and we must know how to share it out amongst objects just as much as amongst other men. Death has only given and received meaning, that is to say, it is socialised through exchange. In the primitive order, everything is done so that death is that way. In our culture, on the contrary, everything is done so that death is never done to anybody by someone else, but only by ‘nature’, as an impersonal expiry of the body. We experience our death as 187 Political Economy and Death the ‘real’ fatality inscribed in our bodies only because we no longer know how to inscribe it into a ritual of symbolic exchange. The order of the ‘real’, of the ‘objectivity’ of the body as elsewhere the order of political economy, are always the results of the rupture of this exchange. It is from this point that even our bodies came into existence as the place in which our inex- changeable death is confined, and we end up believing in the biological essence of the body, watched over by death which in turn is watched over by science. Biology is pregnant with death, and the body taking shape within it is itself pregnant with death, and there are no more myths to come and free it. The myth and the ritual that used to free the body from science’s supremacy has been lost, or has not yet been found. We try to circumscribe the others, our objects and our own body within a destiny of instrumentality so as no longer to receive death from them but there is nothing we can do about this – the same goes for death as for every- thing else: no longer willing to give or receive it, death encircles us in the biological simulacrum of our own body. The Death Penalty Until the eighteenth century, we hanged guilty animals, after a formal condem- nation, for causing a man’s death. We even hanged horses. Author unknown There had to be a very specific reason for the revulsion inspired in us by punishing these animals, since it ought to have been more serious to judge a man than an animal, and more odious to make him suffer. But, in one way or another, hanging a horse or a pig, like hanging a madman or a child, seems more odious to us, since they are ‘not responsible’. This secret equality of consciousness in law, so that the condemned always retain the privilege of denying the right of the other to judge, this possible challenge which is quite different from the right to a defence and which re-establishes a minimum of symbolic opposition, no longer exists at all in the case of the animal or the madman. It is precisely the application of a symbolic ritual to a situation which prohibits the possibility of a symbolic response and gives this type of punishment its particularly odious character. As opposed to physical elimination, justice is a social, moral and ritual act. The odious character of punishing a child or a madman comes from the moral aspect of justice: if the ‘other’ must be convinced of their guilt and condemned as such, punishment looses all meaning, since neither con- sciousness of the wrong nor even humiliation are possible with these ‘criminals’. It is therefore as stupid as crucifying lions. But there is some- thing else in the punishment of an animal, which this time derives from the ritual character of justice. It is the application of a human ceremonial to a beast, rather than just the infliction of death, that gives the scene its extraor- dinary atrocity. Every attempt to dress an animal, every disguise and attempt to tame an animal to the human comedy is sinister and unhealthy. By dying, it would become frankly unbearable. Symbolic Exchange and Death188 But why this revulsion at seeing an animal treated like a human being? Because then man changes into a beast. In the hanged animal there is, by way of the sign and the ritual, a hanged man, but a man changed into a beast as if by black magic. A ‘reflex’ signification results from the ubiqui- tous action of the deep reciprocity, whatever we are dealing with, between man and animal or the executioner and his victim, mingled with the visual representation in a terrible confusion, and this malific ambiguity (as in Kafka’s ‘Metamorphosis’) gives rise to disgust. The end of culture, of the social, the end of the rules of the game. Killing a beast in this fundamentally human manner unleashes an equivalent monstrosity in the man, who thus becomes the victim of his own ritual. The institution of justice, by which man claims to draw a line between himself and ‘brutality’, turns against him. Of course, such brutality is a myth – a caesura that implies the abso- lute privilege of the human, the expulsion of the animal into the ‘brutal’. This discrimination is justified, however, when at the same time as the privilege, it implies all the risks and responsibilities of the human, in partic- ular that of justice and social death, which by contrast, according to the same logic, does not concern the animal at all. For man to impose this form on the animal is to erase the limit between the two, and at the same time to eliminate the human. Man is then only the squalid caricature of the myth of animality that he himself has instituted. We do not need psychoanalysis, the ‘Father-Figure’, sadistic eroticism and guilt to explain the nausea attendant upon the torture of animals. Everything here is social, everything relates to the social line of demarca- tion that man traces around himself in accordance with a mythical code of differences, and to the contortions that shatter this line, in accordance with the law that states that reciprocity never ends: every discrimination is only ever imaginary and is forever cut across by symbolic reciprocity, for better or worse. Of course, this nausea, bound up with the loss of the privilege of the human, is also therefore proper to a social order, where the break with the animal, and therefore the abstraction of the human, is definitive. This revul- sion distinguishes us: it signifies that human Reason has made progress, allowing us to consign all this ‘medieval’ torture of humans and animals to ‘barbarism’. ‘As late as 1906 in Switzerland, a dog was tried and executed for participating in theft and murder.’ We are so reassured when we read that ‘we are no longer like that’, the subtext of which is ‘today we are “humane” to animals, we respect them’. But the opposite is the case: disgust is inspired in us by the execution of an animal in exact proportion to the contempt in which we hold it. It is insofar, as is proper to our culture, as we relegate the animal to a non-human state of irresponsibility that the animal becomes unworthy of the human ritual. All we need then do is apply this ritual to the animal to make us nauseous, not because of some moral prog- ress, but because of the deepening of human racism. Those who, in times past, used to ritually sacrifice animals did not take them to be beasts. Even medieval society, which condemned and punished 189 Political Economy and Death animals in accordance with its own norms, was far closer than we are to those who are horrified by this practice. By holding animals culpable, these societies paid them tribute. The innocence to which we consign animals (along with madmen, the sick and children) is significant of the radical distance separating us from them, and of the racial exclusion by which we rigorously maintain the definition of the Human. In a context where every living being is a partner in exchange, the animal has the ‘right’ to sacrifice and to ritual expiation. The primitive sacrifice of the animal is bound up with its exceptional and sacred status as a divinity, as a totem.30 We no longer sacrifice them, we no longer even punish them, and we take pride in this; but this is simply because we have domesticated them and because we have turned them into a racially inferior world, no longer even worthy of our justice; they are barely even exterminable as butcher meat. Or perhaps rational liberal thought takes those it excommunicates into their charge, such as animals, madmen and children who ‘know not what they do’, and who therefore do not deserve punishment and death as much as they do public charity: protectionism of every kind, the RSPCA, ‘open’ psychiatry, modern pedagogy; all the definitive but gentle forms of inferiorisation in which Liberal Reason takes refuge. A racial compensation whereby human- ism increases its privilege over ‘inferior beings’.31 In the light of all this, the question of the death penalty is posed, which is also the question of the naïvety or hypocrisy of every liberal humanism on this question. With the primitives, the ‘criminal’ is not an inferior, abnormal or irre- sponsible being. On him, like the ‘mad’ or the ‘sick’, a great number of the symbolic cycles are articulated. Some of this can still be detected in Marx’s formulation of the criminal as an essential function of the bourgeois order. It is onto the king that responsibility for the crime par excellence devolves: breaking the incest taboo (which is why he is king, and why he will be put to death). His expiation confers on him the highest status, since it is also what relaunches the cycle of exchanges. There is a whole philosophy of cruelty (in Artaud’s sense) here, which we are no longer familiar with, and which excludes social infamy as it does the death penalty: the death of the criminal-king is not a sanction, it neither separates nor removes something rotten on the social body; on the contrary, it is a festival and an elevation in which solidarity is renewed and separations undone. The madman, the fool, the bandit, the hero and many other characters from traditional societies have all played, relatively speaking, the same role as agents of symbolic ferment. Society was articulated on their difference. The dead were the first to play this role. Still untouched by social Reason, traditional societies coped with the criminal extremely well, even if it was by collective ritual death,32 just like peasant societies with their village idiots, even if it was as objects of ritual derision. The end of the culture of cruelty where difference is glorified and expi- ated in one and the same sacrificial act. We no longer know any other way of dealing with deviants but extermination or therapy. We now only know Symbolic Exchange and Death190 how to cut, expurgate and repel them into society’s dark regions. And this only to the extent of our ‘tolerance’, our sovereign conception of freedom. If contemporary societies have progressed to the moral level, this does not rule out their regression to mood shifts. (Encyclopaedia Universalis) By being normalised, that is to say, by extending the logic of equivalences to everyone, society, socialised at last, excludes every antibody. It then cre- ates, in the same movement, specific institutions to receive them, and so, throughout successive centuries, prisons, asylums, hospitals and schools have flourished, not to forget the factories, which also began to flourish with the Rights of Man (this is how labour must be understood). Socialisation is nothing but the immense passage from the symbolic exchange of difference to the social logic of equivalence. Every ‘social’ or socialist ‘ideal’ merely doubles the process of socialisation. Even liberal thought, which wants to abolish the death penalty, simply perpetuates it. As regards the death penalty, the thought of the right (hysterical reaction) and the thought of the left (rational humanism) are both equally removed from the symbolic configuration where crime, madness and death are modalities of exchange, the ‘accursed share’ around which all exchange gravitates. Why do we rein- tegrate the criminal into society? To make him into the equivalent of a normal man? But exactly the opposite is true. As Gentis says: ‘It is not a question of returning the madman to the truth of society, but of returning society to the truth of madness’ (Les Murs de l’asile). All humanist thought grows faint in the face of this demand, which was openly realised in previ- ous societies, and is always present, but hidden and violently repressed, in our own (crime and death always provoke the same secret jubilation; it is however debased and obscene). If the bourgeois order first got rid of crime and madness by elimination or confinement, then secondly it neutralised all this on a therapeutic basis. This is the phase of the progressive absolution of the criminal and his reform into a social being, by every devious means of medicine and psychology. We must see, however, that this liberal change of policy takes place on the basis of a wholly repressive social space whose normal mechanisms have absorbed the repressive function that hitherto devolved onto special institutions.33 Liberal thinking believes this cannot be put better than its claim that ‘penal law is called upon to develop in the direction of a preventative social medicine and a curative social service’ (Encyclopaedia Universalis). Does this imply the disappearance of the penal aspect of the law? Not at all: the penalty is called upon to be realised in its purest form in great therapeutic, psychological and psychiatric reform programmes. Penal violence finds its most subtle equivalent in re-socialisation and re-education (also in the form of self-criticism or repentance, according to the dominant social system), and from this point we are all summoned to it in normal life itself: we are all madmen and criminals.34 It is not just that penal violence and the death penalty might disappear in this society, but that they must, and the abolitionists, totally contradicting 191 Political Economy and Death themselves, merely follow the tendency of the system. They want to abolish the death penalty without abolishing responsibility (since without respon- sibility, there would be no human conscience or dignity, and therefore no liberal thought!). This is illogical, and above all futile, since responsibility has been dead for a long time. As a vestigial individual trait from the Enlightenment, it has been eliminated by the system itself as the latter becomes more rational. When capitalism rested on merit, initiative, individ- ual enterprise and competition, it needed an ideal of responsibility, and therefore its repressive equivalent: for better or worse, everyone, whether entrepreneur or criminal, received his penalty or his credit. In a system that rests on bureaucratic programming and the execution of a plan, irresponsible executants are required, and so the entire system of values based on respon- sibility collapses into itself, since it is no longer viable. It is a matter of indifference whether you struggle for abolition or not: the death penalty is useless. Justice also collapses: generally irresponsible, the individual becomes, whatever happens to him, a pretext for bureaucratic structures, and will no longer accept being tried by just anyone, nor even by society as a whole. Even the problem of collective responsibility is a red herring: responsibility has quite simply disappeared. Hence the secondary benefit of the elimination of humanist values and the dismantling of the repressive apparatus, based on the possibility of being able to distinguish ‘in one’s conscience’, between good and evil, and on this criterion to be able to try and to condemn. But this order has had every opportunity to renounce the death penalty. It is still making gains in this respect, and hence open prisons become possible. For death and the prison were the truth of the social jurisdiction of a society that remained heterogeneous and divided. Therapy and reform are the truth of the social jurisdiction of a homogeneous and normalised society. The thought of the right still refers to the first, while the thought of the left refers to the sec- ond; both, however, obey the same system of values. In other contexts, both speak the same medical language: remove a dis- eased member, says the right; cure a sick organ, says the left. On either side death acts at the level of equivalences. The primitive procedure is only aware of reciprocities: clan contra clan, death contra death (gift contra gift). We know only a system of equivalences (a death for a death) between two terms as abstract as in economic exchange: society and the individual under the jurisdiction of a ‘universal’ and legal morality. A death for a death, says the right, fair’s fair, you have killed so you must die, that’s the law of the contract. Intolerable, says the left, the criminal must be spared: he is not really responsible. The principle of equivalence is intact: basically one of the terms (responsibility) tends towards zero, while the other (penalty) also tends in this direction. The environment, child- hood, the unconscious, 35 social conditions, outline a new equation of responsibility, but still in terms of causality and the contract. In the terms of this new contract, the criminal merits no more than (Christian) pity or social security. Here again, the thought of the left merely invents more Symbolic Exchange and Death192 subtle neo-capitalist formations, where repression becomes diffuse, as surplus-value did in another context. In the psychiatric and ergonomic cures, however, it is very much a matter of an equivalent to death. Here the individual is treated as a functional survivor, as an object to be retrained: we surround him with care and solicitude, so many traits of his anomaly, and we invest in him. The tolerance he enjoys is of the same order as that we have seen being exercised over the beasts: it is an operation by means of which the social order exorcises and controls its own hauntings. Does the system make us all irresponsible? We can only accept this if we delimit a category of notorious examples of irresponsibility, that we will care for as such. By the effect of contrast, it will return the illusion of responsibility to us. Delinquents, criminals, children and madmen will suffer the effects of this clinical operation. A simple examination of the evolution of the death penalty in ‘materialist’ terms (of profit and class) should leave those who wish to abolish it in perplexity. It is always through the discovery of more profitable economic substitutes, subsequently rationalised as ‘more humane’, that the death penalty is curbed: hence prisoners of war are spared in order to be made slaves; hence, in Rome, criminals were sent to the salt mines; hence the prohibition of duels in the seventeenth century, the institution of forced labour as a corrective solution, the variable extortion of the labour force and the ergo-therapeutic retraining of the Nazi camps. There are no mira- cles anywhere: death disappears or subsides when the system, for one reason or another, has an interest in it (1830: the first extenuating circum- stances in a trial involving a bourgeois). Neither social conquest nor the progress of Reason: just the logic of profit or privilege.36 But this analysis remains totally insufficient, since it merely substitutes an economic for a moral rationality. Something else is in operation here, a ‘heavy’ hypothesis with respect to which the materialist interpretation appears to be a ‘light’ hypothesis. Profit may be an effect of capital, but it is never the fundamental law of the social order. It’s fundamental law is the progressive control of life and death. Its objective is equally therefore to snatch death away from radical difference in order to submit it to the law of equivalence. And the naïvety of humanist thought (liberal or revolutionary) consists in not seeing that its rejection of death is necessarily the same as that of the system, that is, the rejection of something that escapes the law of value. It is only in this sense that death is an evil. But humanist thought turns it into an absolute evil, and it is from this point that it becomes enmeshed in the worst contradictions.37 Claude Glayman (discussing the execution of Buffet and Bontemps): The irremediably human feeling that no man has the right to deal out death at will (‘irremediably’ is a kind of lapsus: the humanist does not appear to be totally convinced of this evidence). Life is sacred. But even without religious faith we are completely persuaded. … In a consumer society that tends to banish scarcity, death, we might say, is still more intolerable (life as a con- sumer good, death as scarcity: what an incredible platitude! But communism, 193 Political Economy and Death and even Marx himself, are in agreement over this equation.) … Here too, the impression of a sort of permanence of the Middle Ages remains. … What society do we live in? What shores are we drifting towards? For we must not turn our backs on life, whatever it may be. (Le Monde) This is precisely the ‘rear’ entry to life, the basic principle of pious souls, who are also those who enter the revolution backwards and turn their backs on life. These unbelievable acrobatics are, however, typical of thought bending over backwards to satisfy its rejection of death. We can clearly see that the humanist debate starts from the individualist system of values of which it is the crown: ‘The social and individual instinct of conservation’, says Camus, ‘requires the postulate of individual responsi- bility.’ But precisely these postulates define the platitude of life and death in our equivalence-dominated systems. Beyond this point, man need only cultivate the instinct of conservation or responsibility (two complementary prejudices in the abstract and rationalist view of the subject). Death resumes its meaning as a sacrificial exchange, a collective moment and an intense deliverance of the subject. ‘There is no passion … so weak but it mates and masters the fear of death’, said Bacon (Essays [London: Dent, 1906], Vol. II, p. 6). But this is too little: death is itself a passion. And at this level the difference between self and others is effaced: ‘The desire to kill often coincides with the desire to die oneself or to eliminate oneself’; ‘Man desires to live, but he also desires to be nothing, he wants what cannot be undone, he wants death for its own sake. In this case, not only will the pos- sibility of being put to death not stop the criminal, it is rather probable that it will add to the vertigo in which he is lost.’ We know that suicide and murder can often be substitutes for one another, with a strong predilection for suicide. This passionate, sacrificial death overtly accepts the spectacle of death, which, as with all organic functions, we have made into a moral and there- fore clandestine and shameful function. The good souls heavily insist on the shameful character of public executions, but they do not see that odiousness of this type of execution stems from its contemplative attitude in which the death of the other is savoured as a spectacle at a distance. This is not sacri- ficial violence, which not only demands the presence of the whole community, but is one of the forms of its self-presence [présence à ellemème]. We rediscover something of this contagious festivity in an episode in England in 1807, when the 40,000 people who came to attend an execu- tion were seized by delirium upon seeing a hundred dead bodies lying on the ground. This collective act has nothing in common with the spectacle of extermination. By confusing the two in the same abstract reprobation of violence and death, one merges with the thought of the State, that is, the pacification of life. Now, if the right prefers to use repressive blackmail, the left, for its part, is distinguished by imagining and setting up future models of pacified socialisation. A civilisation’s progress is thus measured only by its respect for life as absolute value. What a difference from public, celebrated death by torture Symbolic Exchange and Death194 (the Black from the Upper Volta laughing in the face of the guns that hit him, cannibalism in the Tupinamba), and even murder and vengeance, pas- sion for death and suicide! When society kills in a totally premeditated fashion, we do it a great honour when we accuse it of a barbaric vengeance worthy of the Dark Ages, because vengeance is still a fatal reciprocity. It is neither ‘primitive’ nor ‘purely the way of nature’; nothing could be more false. It has nothing to do with our calculable and statistical abstract death, which is the by-product of an agency both moral and bureaucratic (our capital punishment and concentration camps), and thus has everything to do with the system of political economy. This system is similarly abstract, but never in the way that a revenge, a murder or a sacrificial spectacle is abstract. We have produced a judicial, ethnocidal and concentration camp death, to which our society has adjusted. Today, everything and nothing has changed: under the sign of the values of life and tolerance, the same system of extermination, only gentler, governs everyday life, and it has no need of death to accomplish its objectives. The same objective that is inscribed in the monopoly of institutional violence is accomplished as easily by forced survival as it is by death: a forced ‘life for life’s sake’ (kidney machines, malformed children on life-support machines, agony prolonged at all costs, organ transplants, etc.). All these procedures are equivalent to disposing of death and imposing life, but according to what ends? Those of science and medicine? Surely this is just scientific paranoia, unrelated to any human objective. Is profit the aim? No: society swallows huge amounts of profit. This ‘therapeutic heroism’ is char- acterised by soaring costs and ‘decreasing benefits’: they manufacture unproductive survivors. Even if social security can still be analysed as ‘com- pensation for the labour force in the interests of capital’, this argument has no purchase here. Nevertheless, the system is facing the same contradiction here as with the death penalty: it overspends on the prolongation of life because this system of values is essential to the strategic equilibrium of the whole; economically, however, this overspending unbalances the whole. What is to be done? An economic choice becomes necessary, where we can see the outline of euthanasia as a semiofficial doctrine or practice. We choose to keep 30 per cent of the uraemics in France alive (36 per cent in the USA!). Euthanasia is already everywhere, and the ambiguity of making a humanist demand for it (as with the ‘freedom’ to abortion) is striking: it is inscribed in the middle to long term logic of the system. All this tends in the direction of an increase in social control. For there is a clear objective behind all these apparent contradictions: to ensure control over the entire range of life and death. From birth control to death control, whether we execute people or compel their survival (the prohibition of dying is the caricature, but also the logical form of progressive tolerance), the essential thing is that the decision is withdrawn from them, that their life and their death are never freely theirs, but that they live or die according to a social visa. It is even intolerable that their life and death remain open to biological chance, since this is still a type of freedom. Just as morality commanded: ‘You shall 195 Political Economy and Death not kill’, today it commands: ‘You shall not die’, not in any old way, anyhow, and only if the law and medicine permit. And if your death is conceded you, it will still be by order. In short, death proper has been abolished to make room for death control and euthanasia: strictly speaking, it is no longer even death, but something completely neutralised that comes to be inscribed in the rules and calculations of equivalence: rewriting-planning-programming- system. It must be possible to operate death as a social service, integrate it like health and disease under the sign of the Plan and Social Security. This is the story of ‘motel-suicides’ in the USA, where, for a comfortable sum, one can purchase one’s death under the most agreeable conditions (like any other consumer good); perfect service, everything has been foreseen, even trainers who give you back your appetite for life, after which they kindly and conscientiously send the gas into your room, without torment and without meeting any opposition. A service operates these motel-suicides, quite rightly paid (eventually reimbursed?). Why did death not become a social service when, like everything else, it is functionalised as individual and computable consumption in social input and output? In order that the system consents to such economic sacrifices in the artificial resurrection of its living losses, it must have a fundamental inter- est in withdrawing even the biological chance of death from people. ‘You die, we’ll do the rest’ is already just an old advertising slogan used for funeral homes. Today, dying is already part of the rest, and the Thanatos centres charge for death just as the Eros centres charge for sex. The witch hunt continues. A transcendent, ‘objective’ agency requires a delegation of justice, death and vengeance. Death and expiation must be wrested from the circuit, monopolised at the summit and redistributed. A bureaucracy of death and punishment is necessary, in the same way as there must be an abstraction of economic, political and sexual exchanges: if not, the entire structure of social control collapses. This is why every death and all violence that escapes the State monop- oly is subversive; it is a prefiguration of the abolition of power. Hence the fascination wielded by great murderers, bandits or outlaws, which is in fact closely akin to that associated with works of art: a piece of death and violence is snatched from the State monopoly in order to be put back into the savage, direct and symbolic reciprocity of death, just as something in feasting and expenditure is retrieved from the economic in order to be put back into useless and sacrificial exchange, and just as something in the poem or the artwork is retrieved from the terrorist economy of significa- tion in order to be put back into the consumption of signs. This alone is what is fascinating in our system. Only what is not exchanged as values, that is, sex, death, madness and violence, is fascinating, and for this reason is universally repressed. Millions of war dead are exchanged as values in accordance with a general equivalence: ‘dying for the fatherland’; we might say they can be converted into gold, the world has not lost them altogether. Murder, death and violation are legalised everywhere, if not Symbolic Exchange and Death196 legal, provided that they can be reconverted into value in accordance with the same process that mediatises labour. Only certain deaths, certain prac- tices, escape this convertibility; they alone are subversive, but do not often make the headlines. Amongst these is suicide, which in our societies has taken on a different extension and definition, to the point of becoming, in the context of the offensive reversibility of death, the form of subversion itself. While there are fewer and fewer executions, more and more commit suicide in prison, an act of subverting [détournement] institutional death and turning it against the system that imposes it: through suicide, the individual tries and condemns society in accordance with its own norms, by inverting the authorities and reinstating reversibility where it had completely disappeared, while at the same time regaining the advantage. Even suicides outside prison become political in this sense (hari-kiri by fire is only the most spectacular form of this): they make an infinitesimal but inexpiable breach, since it is total defeat for a system not to be able to attain total perfection. All that is needed is that the slightest thing escapes its rationality. The prohibition of suicide coincides with the advent of the law of value. Whether religious, moral or economic, the same law states ‘no-one has the right to remove any capital or value’. Yet each individual is a parcel of cap- ital (just as every Christian is a soul to be saved), and therefore has no right to destroy himself. It is against this orthodoxy of value that the suicide revolts by destroying the parcel of capital he has at his disposal. This is unpardonable: we will go so far as to hang the suicide for having succeeded. It is therefore symptomatic that suicide increases in a society saturated by the law of value, as a challenge to its fundamental rule. But we must also take another look at its definition: if every suicide becomes subversive in a highly integrated system, all subversion of and resistance to this system is reciprocally, by its very nature, suicidal. Those actions at least that strike at its vitals. For the majority of so-called ‘political’ or ‘revolutionary’ practices are content to exchange their survival with the system, that is, to convert their death into cash. There are rarely suicides that stand against the con- trolled production and exchange of death, against the exchange-value of death; not its use-value (for death is perhaps the only thing that has no use-value, which can never be referred back to need, and so can unques- tionably be turned into a weapon) but its value as rupture, contagious dissolution and negation. The Palestinians or the rebellious Blacks setting fire to their own district become suicidal, as is resistance to the security forces in all its forms, as are the neurotic behaviour and multiple breakdowns by which we challenge the system’s capacity to ever fully integrate us. Also suicidal are all political practices (demos, disorder, provocation, etc.) whose objective is to arouse repression, the ‘repressive nature of the system’, not as a secondary conse- quence, but as the immediacy of death: the game of death unmasks the system’s own function of death. The order has possession of death, but it cannot play it out – only those who set death playing against itself win. 197 Political Economy and Death The property system is so absurd that it leads people to demand their death as their own good – the private appropriation of death. The mental devastation of this appropriation is so great that it leads to investment in the ‘immovable’ [immobilier] property of death, not only as a preoccupa- tion with the ‘third home’, such as the tomb or the burial ground have become (many people buy a concession in the village cemetery at the same time as they buy their country house), but as the demand for a ‘quality of death’. A comfortable, personalised, ‘designer’ death, a ‘natural’ death: this is the inalienable right constituting the perfected form of bour- geois individual law. Besides, immortality is only ever the projection of this natural and personal right into infinity – the subject’s appropriation of the afterlife and eternity, her body and her death are equally inalien- able. What despair is hidden by this absurd demand, analogous to that which fuels our delirious accumulation of the objects and signs from which we manically assemble our own private universe: death must once again become the final object in this collection and, instead of going through this inertia as the only possible event, it must itself re-enter the game of accumulating and administering things. Contrary to the twists the subject stamps on his own demise, disposses- sion occurs only in violent, unexpected death, which reinstates the possibility of escaping the neurotic control of the subject.38 Everywhere, a stubborn and fierce resistance springs up to the principle of the accumulation, production and conservation of the subject in which he can read his own programmed death. Everywhere death is played off against death. In a system which adds up living and capitalises life, the death drive is the only alternative. In a meticulously regulated universe, the only temptation is to normalise everything by destruction. Security as Blackmail Security is another form of social control, in the form of life blackmailed with the afterlife. It is universally present for us today, and ‘security forces’ range from life assurance and social security to the car seatbelt by way of the state security police force. 39 ‘Belt up’ says an advertising slogan for seatbelts. Of course, security, like ecology, is an industrial business extend- ing its cover up to the level of the species: a convertibility of accident, disease and pollution into capitalist surplus profit is operative everywhere. But this is above all a question of the worst repression, which consists in dispossessing you of your own death, which everybody dreams of, as the darkness beneath their instinct of conservation. It is necessary to rob every- one of the last possibility of giving themselves their own death as the last ‘great escape’ from a life laid down by the system. Again, in this symbolic short-circuit, the gift-exchange is the challenge to oneself and one’s own life, and is carried out through death. Not because it expresses the individ- ual’s asocial rebellion (the defection of one or millions of individuals does not infringe the law of the system at all), but because it carries in it a Symbolic Exchange and Death198 principle of sociality that is radically antagonistic to our own social repres- sive principle. To bury death beneath the contrary myth of security, it is necessary to exhaust the gift-exchange. Is it so that men might live that the demand for death must be exhausted? No, but in order that they die the only death the system authorises: the living are separated from their dead, who no longer exchange anything but the form of their afterlife, under the sign of com- prehensive insurance. Thus car safety: mummified in his helmet, his seatbelt, all the paraphernalia of security, wrapped up in the security myth, the driver is nothing but a corpse, closed up in another, non-mythic, death, as neutral and objective as technology, noiseless and expertly crafted. Riveted to his machine, glued to the spot in it, he no longer runs the risk of dying, since he is already dead. This is the secret of security, like a steak under cellophane: to surround you with a sarcophagus in order to prevent you from dying.40 Our whole technical culture creates an artificial milieu of death. It is not only armaments that remain the general archetype of material production, but the simplest machine around us constitutes a horizon of death, a death that will never be resolved because it has crystallised beyond reach: fixed capital of death, where the living labour of death has frozen over, as the labour force is frozen in fixed capital and dead labour. In other words, all material production is merely a gigantic ‘character armour’ by means of which the species means to keep death at a respectful distance. Of course, death itself overshadows the species and seals it into the armour the species thought to protect itself with. Here again, commensurate with an entire civilisation, we find the image of the automobile-sarcophagus: the protec- tive armour is just death miniaturised and become a technical extension of your own body. The biologisation of the body and the technicisation of the environment go hand in hand in the same obsessional neurosis. The techni- cal environment is our over-production of pollutant, fragile and obsolescent objects. For production lives, its entire logic and strategy are articulated on fragility and obsolescence. An economy of stable products and good objects is indispensable: the economy develops only by exuding danger, pollution, usury, deception and haunting. The economy lives only on the suspension of death that it maintains throughout material production, and through renewing the available death stocks, even if it means conjuring it up by a security build up: blackmail and repression. Death is definitively secularised in material production, where it is reproduced on a large scale as capital. Even our bodies, which have become biological machinery, are modelled on this inorganic body, and therefore become, at the same time, a bad object, condemned to disease, accident and death. Living by the production of death, capital has an easy time producing security: it’s the same thing. Security is the industrial prolongation of death, just as ecology is the industrial prolongation of pollution. A few more bandages on the sarcophagus. This is also true of the great institutions that are the glory of our democracy: Social Security is the social prosthesis of 199 Political Economy and Death a dead society (‘Social Security is death!’ – May ’68), that is to say, a soci- ety already exterminated in all its symbolic wheels, in its deep system of reciprocities and obligations, which means that neither the concept of secu- rity nor that of the ‘social’ ever had any meaning. The ‘social’ begins by taking charge of death. It’s the same story as regards cultures that have been destroyed then revived and protected as folklore (cf. M. de Certeau, ‘La beauté du mort’ [in La culture au pluriel, Paris: UGE, 1974]). The same goes for life assurance, which is the domestic variant of a system which everywhere presupposes death as an axiom. The social translation of the death of the group – each materialising for the other only as social capital indexed on death. Death is dissuaded at the price of a continual mortification: such is the par- adoxical logic of security. In a Christian context, ascesis played the same role. The accumulation of suffering and penitence was able to play the same role as character armour, as a protective sarcophagus against hell. And our obsessional compulsion for security can be interpreted as a gigantic collective ascesis, an anticipation of death in life itself: from protection into protection, from defence to defence, crossing all jurisdictions, institutions and modern material apparatuses, life is no longer anything but a doleful, defensive book-keeping, locking every risk into its sarcophagus. Keeping the accounts on survival, instead of the radical compatibility of life and death. Our system lives off the production of death and pretends to manufac- ture security. An about-face? Not at all, just a simple twist in the cycle whose two ends meet. That an automobile firm remodels itself on the basis of security (like industry on anti-pollution measures) without altering its range, objectives or products shows that security is only a question of exchanging terms. Security is only an internal condition of the reproduction of the system when it reaches a certain level of expansion, just as feedback is only an internal regulating procedure for systems that have reached a certain point of complexity. After having exalted production, today we must therefore make security heroic. ‘At a time when anybody at all can be killed driving any car what- soever, at whatever speed, the true hero is he who refuses to die’ (a Porsche hoarding: ‘Let’s put an end to a certain glorification of death’). But this is difficult, since people are indifferent to security: they did not want it when Ford and General Motors proposed it between 1955 and 1960. It had to be imposed in every instance. Irresponsible and blind? No, this resistance must be added to that which traditional groups throughout have opposed to ‘rational’ social progress: vaccination, medicine, job security, a school edu- cation, hygiene, birth control and many other things: Always these resistances have been broken, and today we can produce a ‘natural’, ‘eternal’ and ‘spontaneous’ state based on the need for security and all the good things that our civilisation has produced. We have successfully infected people with the virus of conservation and security, even though they will have to fight to the death to get it. In fact, it is more complicated, since they are fighting for the right to security, which is of a profoundly Symbolic Exchange and Death200 different order. As regards security itself, no-one gives a damn. They had to be infected over generations for them to end up believing that they ‘needed’ it, and this success is an essential aspect of ‘social’ domestication and colo- nisation. That entire groups would have preferred to die out rather than see their own structures annihilated by the terrorist intervention of medicine, reason, science and centralised power – this has been forgotten, swept away under the universal moral law of the ‘instinct’ of conservation. However, this resistance always reappears, even if only in the form of the workers’ refusal to apply safety standards in the factories; what do they want out of this, if not to salvage a little bit of control over their lives, even if they put themselves at risk, or if its price is increasing exploitation (since they pro- duce at ever greater speed)? These are not ‘rational’ proletarians. But they struggle in their own way, and they know that economic exploitation is not as serious as the ‘accursed share’, the accursed fragment that above all they must not allow to be taken from them, the share of symbolic challenge, which is at the same time a challenge to security and to their own lives. The boss can exploit them to death, but he will only really dominate them if he manages to make each identify with their own individual interests and become the accountant and the capitalist of their own lives. He would then genuinely be the Master, and the worker the slave. As long as the exploited retain the choice of life and death through this small resistance to security and the moral order, they win on their own, symbolic, ground. The car driver’s resistance to security is of the same order and must be eliminated as immoral: thus suicide has been prohibited or condemned everywhere because primarily it signifies a challenge that society cannot reply to, and which therefore ensures the pre-eminence of a single suicide over the whole social order. Always the accursed share (the fragment that everyone takes from their own lives so as to challenge the social order; the fragment that everyone takes from their own body so as to give it; this may even be their own death, on condition that everyone gives it away), the fragment which is the whole secret of symbolic exchange, because it is given, received and returned, and cannot therefore be breached by the dom- inant exchange, remaining irreducible to its law and fatal to it: its only real adversary, the only one it must exterminate. Funeral Homes and Catacombs By dint of washing, soaping, furbishing, brushing, painting, sponging, polish- ing, cleaning and scouring, the grime from the things washed rubs off onto living things. Victor Hugo The same goes for death: by dint of being washed and sponged, cleaned and scoured, denied and warded off, death rubs off onto every aspect of life. Our whole culture is hygienic, and aims to expurgate life from death. The detergents in the weakest washing powder are intended for death. To sterilise death at all costs, to varnish it, cryogenically freeze it, air-condition 201 Political Economy and Death it, put make-up on it, ‘design’ it, to pursue it with the same relentlessness as grime, sex, bacteriological or radioactive waste. The make-up of death: Hugo’s formula makes us think of those American funeral homes where death is immediately shielded from mourning and the promiscuity of the living in order to be ‘designed’ according to the purest laws of standing, smiling and international marketing. It is not so worrying that the dead man is made beautiful and given the appearance of a representation. Every society has always done this. They have always staved off the abjection of natural death, the social abjection of decomposition which voids the corpse of its signs and its social force of sig- nification, leaving it as nothing more than a substance, and by the same token, precipitating the group into the terror of its own symbolic decomposition. It is necessary to ward off death, to smother it in artificiality in order to evade the unbearable moment when flesh becomes nothing but flesh, and ceases to be a sign. The skeleton, with its stripped bones, already seals the possible reconciliation of the group, for it regains the force of the mask and the sign. But between the two, there is the abject passage through nature and the biological that must be warded off at all costs by sarcophagic practices (the devouring of flesh), which are in fact semiurguic practices. Therefore, every thanatopraxis, even in contemporary societies, is analysed as the will to ward off this sudden loss of signs that befalls the dead, to prevent there remaining, in the asocial flesh of the dead, something which signifies nothing.41 In short, every society has its sarcophagic rituals; embalming, the artificial preservation of the flesh, is one of its variants. The practices of the funeral homes, which appear so ridiculous and misplaced to us, idealists of natural death that we are, therefore remain faithful to the most remote traditions. The point at which they become absurd is their connotation of naturalness. When the primitive showers the dead with signs, it is in order to make the transition towards the state of death as quick as possible, beyond the ambi- guity between the living and the dead which is precisely what the disintegrating flesh testifies to. It is not a question of making the dead play the role of the living: the primitive concedes the dead their difference, for it is at this cost that they will be able to become partners and exchange their signs. The funeral home scenario goes the other way. Here, it becomes a question of the dead retaining the appearance of life, the naturalness of life: he still smiles at you, the same colours, the same skin, he seems himself even after death, he is even a little fresher than when he was alive, and lacks only speech (but we can still hear this in stereo). A faked death, idealised in the colours of life: the secret idea is that life is natural and death is against nature. Death must therefore be naturalised in a stuffed simulacrum of life. In all of this there is on the one hand a refusal to let death signify, take on the force of a sign, and, behind this sentimental nature-fetishism on the other, a great ferocity as regards the dead himself: rotting and change are forbidden, and instead of being carried over to death and thus the symbolic recognition of the living, he is maintained as a puppet within the orbit of the living in order to serve as an alibi and a simulacrum of their own lives. Symbolic Exchange and Death202 Consigned to the natural, he loses his right to difference along with every chance of a social status. This is what separates those societies that are afraid neither of the sign nor of death, since they make it signify overtly, from our ‘ideological’ societies where everything is buried under the natural, where signs have become noth- ing but designs, entertaining the illusion of a natural reason. Death is the first victim of this ideologisation: rigidly set in the banal simulacrum of life, it becomes shameful and obscene. There is an enormous difference between these sanctuaries and drug- stores of smiling, sterilised death and the corridors of the Capuchin convent in Palermo, where three centuries of disinterred corpses, meticulously foss- ilised in the clay of the cemetery, with skin, hair and nails, lie flat or suspended by the shoulders in close ranks, along the length of reserved corridors (the corridor of the religious, the corridor of the intellectuals, the corridors of women, children, etc.), still dressed either in a crude wrap or, on the contrary, in costume with gloves and powdered muslin. In the pale half light from the barred windows, 8,000 corpses in an incredible multiplicity of attitudes – sardonic, languid, heads bent, fierce or timid: a dance of death which was for a long time, before becoming the Grevin Museum for the tourists, a place for dominical walks for the relatives and friends who used to come to see their dead, to acknowledge them, show them to their chil- dren with the familiarity of the living, a ‘dominicality’ of death similar to those of the Mass or the theatre. A Baroque of death (the first unburied corpses date from the sixteenth century and the Counter-Reformation). The solidity of a society capable of exhuming its dead, of opening a route to them, half-way between intimacy and the spectacle, of bearing without fright or obscene curiosity, that is, without the effects of sublimation and seriousness to which we are accustomed, the theatre of death, where cruelty is still a sign, even if this is no longer in the bloody rites of the Tarahumaras. What a contrast with the fragility of our societies, which are incapable of confronting death without wan humour or perverse fascination. What a contrast with the anxious warding off in the funeral homes. The Dereliction of Death The cult of the dead is on the wane. An order has been placed over the tombs, no longer a perpetual concession. The dead become socially mobile. The devotion to death remains, particularly in the working or middle classes, but today this is much more as a variable of status (a second home) than as tribal piety. We speak less and less of the dead, we cut ourselves short and fall silent: death is discredited. End of a solemn and detailed ‘death in the family’: we die in hospital, death has become extraterritorial. The dying lose their rights, including the right to know when they are going to die. Death, like mourning, has become obscene and awkward, and it is good taste to hide it, since it can offend the well-being of others. Etiquette forbids any refer- ence to the dead. Cremation is the limit point of this discrete elimination, 203 Political Economy and Death since it minimalises the remains. No more vertigo of death, only dereliction [désaffecté]. And the immense funeral cortège is no longer of a pious order, it is the sign of dereliction itself, of the consumption of death. In conse- quence, it grows in proportion to the disinvestment of death. We no longer have the experience that others had of death. Spectacular and televised experience has nothing to do with this. The majority no lon- ger have the opportunity to see somebody die. In any other type of society, this is something unthinkable. The hospital and medicine take charge of you; the technical Extreme Unction has replaced every other sacrament. Man disappears from his nearest and dearest before being dead. He dies somewhere else. Roos, a Swiss woman, had the idea of going to speak to the dying about their own death, of making them speak. This is an obscene idea, a general denegation: no-one dies in the service of any hospital (it is the staff that have a problem). She was taken to be a madwoman, a provocatrice, and so she discharged herself from hospital. When she found a dying man to speak to, she went to find her students, but on her return she found him dead (here, she perceived that the problem was hers and her students’). She has subsequently succeeded: soon there will be a staff of psychologists to watch over the dying and give speech back to them. The neo-spiritualism of the human and psycho-social sciences. The priest and the extreme unction still bore a trace of the community where death was discussed. Today, blackout. In any case, if the priest was nothing but a vulture, today this function is largely fulfilled by the doctor, who shuts speech off by overwhelming the dying with care and technical concern. An infantile death that no longer speaks, an inarticulate death, kept out of sight. Serums, laboratories and healing are only the alibi of the pro- hibition of speech. The Exchange of Disease In any case, we no longer die at home, we die in hospital – for many good ‘material’ reasons (medical, urbane, etc.), but especially because the sick or dying or man, as biological body, no longer has any place but within a technical milieu. On the pretext of being cared for, he is then deported to a functional space-time which is charged with neutralising the symbolic difference of death and disease. Precisely where the goal is the elimination of death, the hospital (and medicine in general) takes charge of the sick as the virtually dead. Therapeutic scientificity and efficiency presuppose the radical objectifica- tion of the body, the social discrimination of the sick, and hence a process of mortification. The logical conclusion to the medical genealogy of the body: Medicine becomes modern with the corpse. … It will no doubt remain a decisive fact about our culture that its first scientific discourse concerning the individual had to pass through this stage of death. (Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic [tr. A.M.S. Smith, London: Routledge, 1990], p. 197) Symbolic Exchange and Death204 Mortified, the patient is also deadly, taking his revenge as he can: by means of its functions, its specialisations and its hierarchies, the clinical institution as a whole seeks to preserve itself from contamination from the already- dead. The patient is dangerous because he is expected to die the death to which he has been condemned, and because of the neutrality in which he is enclosed at the term of his cure. From now on, the dead body can only act its incidental nature and its cure, it radiates the total difference between itself and the sick man, and, as dead, all its potential malificence. Neither the technical manipulation, the ‘humane environment’, nor even the occasion of his death in reality will be too much to ensure his silence. The most serious danger the sick man represents, and by reason of which he is genuinely asocial and like a dangerous madman, is his profound demand to be recognised as such and to exchange his disease. It is an aber- rant and inadmissible demand from the sick (and the dying) to base an exchange on this difference, not in order to be cared for and recover, but to give his disease so that it might be received, and therefore symbolically rec- ognised and exchanged, instead of being neutralised in the techniques of clinical death and the strictly functional survival called health and curing. The human or therapeutic relation to the hospital cannot be perfected; the general practice of medicine cannot change anything as concerns the blackout or the symbolic lock-out. Summoned to cure the sick, devoted to healing, the doctor and his helpers, exclusively equipped to cure the entire institution, including its walls, its surgical machinery and its psychological apparatuses (alternating between coldness and solicitude, and today the ‘humanisation’ of the hospital): none of this breaks the fundamental prohi- bition of a different status for disease and death. At best, the sick will be left the possibility of ‘self-expression’, of speaking about his disease, and recontextualising his life, in short the possibility of not experiencing this temporary anomaly so negatively. As regards recognising the madness of disease as difference, as meaning, a wealth of meaning, as material from which to restructure an exchange, without trying in any way to ‘return the sick to their normal lives’, this presupposes the total elimination of medi- cine and the hospital, the entire system of enclosing the body in its ‘functional’ truth; ultimately even the social order in its entirety, for which the mere demand that disease be treated as a structure of exchange is an absolute danger.42 Sexualised Death and Deadly Sex Speaking of death makes us laugh in a strained and obscene manner. Speaking of sex no longer provokes the same reaction: sex is legal, only death is pornographic. Society, having ‘liberated’ sexuality, progressively replaces it with death which functions as a secret rite and fundamental prohibition. In a previous, religious phase, death was revealed, rec- ognised, while sexuality was prohibited. Today the opposite is true. But all ‘historical’ societies are arranged so as to dissociate sex and death in 205 Political Economy and Death every possible way, and play the liberation of one off against the other – which is a way of neutralising them both. Is everything evenly balanced in this strategy, or is there a priority of one term over the other? For the phase which concerns us, everything happens as if the indexation of death were the principal objective, bound up with the exaltation of sexuality: the ‘sexual revolution’ was entirely oriented in this direction, under the sign of the one-dimensional Eros and the function of pleasure. In other places, this is precisely what gave it its naïvety, its pathos, its sentimentality, and, at the same time, its ‘political’ terrorism (the categorical imperative of desire). The slogan of sexuality is in solidarity with political economy, in that it too aims at abolishing death. We will only have exchanged prohibitions. Perhaps, by means of this ‘revolution’, we will even have set up the fundamental prohibition against death. In so doing, the sexual revolution devours itself, since death is the real sexualisation of life. My Death is Everywhere, my Death Dreams Pursued and censured everywhere, death springs up everywhere again. No longer as apocalyptic folklore, such as might have haunted the living imagi- nation in certain epochs; but voided precisely of any imaginary substance, it passes into the most banal reality, and for us takes on the mask of the very principle of rationality that dominates our lives. Death is when everything functions and serves something else, it is the absolute, signing, cybernetic functionality of the urban environment as in Jacques Tati’s film Play-Time. Man is absolutely indexed on his function, as in Kafka: the age of the civil servant is the age of a culture of death. This is the phantasm of total pro- gramming, increased predictability and accuracy, finality not only in material things, but in fulfilling desires. In a word, death is confused with the law of value – and strangely with the structural law of value by which everything is arrested as a coded difference in a universal nexus of relations. This is the true face of ultra-modern death, made up of the faultless, objective, ultra- rapid connection of all the terms in a system. Our true necropolises are no longer the cemeteries, hospitals, wars, hecatombs; death is no longer where we think it is, it is no longer biological, psychological, metaphysical, it is no longer even murder: our societies’ true necropolises are the computer banks or the foyers, blank spaces from which all human noise has been expunged, glass coffins where the world’s sterilised memories are frozen. Only the dead remember everything in something like an immediate eternity of knowledge, a quintessence of the world that today we dream of burying in the form of microfilm and archives, making the entire world into an archive in order that it be discovered by some future civilisation. The cryogenic freezing of all knowledge so that it can be resurrected; knowledge passes into immortality as sign-value. Against our dream of losing and forgetting everything, we set up an opposing great wall of relations, connections and information, a dense and inextricable artificial memory, and we bury ourselves alive in the fossilised hope of one day being rediscovered. Symbolic Exchange and Death206 Computers are the transistorised death to which we submit in the hope of survival. Museums are already there to survive all civilisations, in order to bear testimony. But to what? It is of little importance. The mere fact that they exist testifies that we are in a culture which no longer possesses any meaning for itself and which can now only dream of having meaning for someone else from a later time. Thus everything becomes an environment of death as soon as it is no longer a sign that can be transistorised in a gigan- tic whole, just as money reaches the point of no return when it is nothing more than a system of writing. Basically, political economy is only constructed (at the cost of untold sacrifices) or designed so as to be recognised as immortal by a future civil- isation, or as an instance of truth. As for religion, this is unimaginable other than in the Last Judgement, where God recognises his own. But the Last Judgement is there already, realised: it is the definitive spectacle of our crystallised death. The spectacle is, it must be said, grandiose. From the hieroglyphic schemes of the Defense Department or the World Trade Center to the great informational schemes of the media, from siderurgical complexes to grand political apparatuses, from the megapolises with their senseless control of the slightest and most everyday acts: humanity, as Benjamin says, has everywhere become an object of contemplation to itself. Its self-alienation has reached such a degree that it can experience its own destruction as an aesthetic pleasure of the first order. (‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’, in Illuminations [tr. Harry Zohn, ed. Hannah Arendt, London: Jonathan Cape, 1970], p. 244). For Benjamin, this was the very form of fascism, that is to say, a certain exacerbated form of ideology, an aesthetic perversion of politics, pushing the acceptance of a culture of death to the point of jubilation. And it is true that today the whole system of political economy has become the finality with- out end and the aesthetic vertigo of productivity to us, and this is only the contrasting vertigo of death. This is exactly why art is dead: at the point of saturation and sophistication, all this jubilation has passed into the spectacle of complexity itself, and all aesthetic fascination has been monopolised by the system as it grows into its own double (what else would it do with its gigantic towers, its satellites, its giant computers, if not double itself as signs?). We are all victims of production become spectacle, of the aesthetic enjoy- ment [jouissance], of delirious production and reproduction, and we are not about to turn our backs on it, for in every spectacle there is the immanence of the catastrophe. Today, we have made the vertigo of politics that Benjamin denounces in fascism, its perverse aesthetic enjoyment, into the experience of production at the level of the general system. We produce the experi- ence of a de-politicised, deideologised vertigo of the rational administration of things, of endlessly exploding finalities. Death is immanent to political economy, which is why the latter sees itself as immortal. The revolution too fixes its sights on an immortal objective, in the name of which it demands the suspension of death, in the interests of accumulation. But immortality is 207 Political Economy and Death always the monotonous immortality of a social paradise. The revolution will never rediscover death unless it demands it immediately. Its impasse is to be hooked on the end of political economy as a progressive expiry, whereas the demand for the end of political economy is posed right now, in the demand for immediate life and death. In any case, death and enjoyment, highly prized and priced, will have to be paid for throughout political economy, and will emerge as insoluble problems on the ‘day after’ the revolution. The revolu- tion only opens the way to the problem of death, without the least chance of resolving it. In fact, there is no ‘day after’, only days for the administration of things. Death itself demands to be experienced immediately, in total blind- ness and total ambivalence. But is it revolutionary? If political economy is the most rigorous attempt to put an end to death, it is clear that only death can put an end to political economy. Notes 1. Racism was founded, and from the universal point of view we claim to have overcome it in accordance with the egalitarian morality of humanism. Neither the soul, in times past, nor today the biological characteristics of the species, on which this egalitarian morality is based, offer a more objective or less arbitrary argument than, for example, the colour of one’s skin, since they too are distinctive criteria. On the basis of such criteria (soul or sex), we effectively obtain a Black = White equivalence. This equivalence, however, excludes everything that has not a ‘human’ soul or sex even more radically. Even the savages, who hypostatise neither the soul nor the species, recognise the earth, the animal and the dead as the socius. On the basis of our universal principles, we have rejected them from our egalitarian metahumanism. By integrating Blacks on the basis of white criteria, this metahumanism merely extends the boundaries of abstract sociability, de jure sociality. The same white magic of racism continues to function, merely whitening the Black under the sign of the universal. 2. The more we stress the human character of the divine essence, and the more we see the distance that separates God from man increase, the more we see reflection on religion or theology nullify the identity and unity of the divine essence and the human essence, the more we see the debasement of all that is human, in the sense that human consciousness becomes its object. The reason for this is that if everything positive in the conception we have of the divine being is reduced to the human, then man, the object of conscious- ness, could only become a negative and inhuman conception. To enrich God, man must become poor (Ludwig Feuerbach, The Essence of Christianity [I.H.G. translation; available tr. George Eliot, New York: Harper and Row, 1957] ). This text clearly describes an ‘abduction’ into the universal. The universalisation of God is always bound up with an exclusion and reduction of the human in its originality. When God starts to resemble man, man no longer resembles anything. What Feuerbach does not say, because he is still too wrapped up in religion, is that the universalisation of man also takes place at the cost of the exclusion of all others (madmen, children, etc.) in their dif- ference. When Man starts to resemble Man, others no longer resemble anything. Defined as universality and as an ideal reference, the Human, just like God, is properly inhuman and extravagant. Feuerbach has equally nothing to say concerning the act of abduction, by which God captures the human for his own ends, in such a way that man is nothing more than the anaemic negative of God, which, backfiring, killed God himself. Even Man is dying from the various ‘inhumanities’ (madness, infancy, savagery) he has instituted. 3. At a time when public sector housing is taking on the appearance of a cemetery, cem- eteries normally adopt the form of real estate (as in Nice, etc.). On the other hand, Symbolic Exchange and Death208 it is remarkable that in the American metropolis, and often in the French, traditional cemeteries constitute the only green, or empty, spaces in the urban ghetto. That the space of the dead became the only district in the city where living is tolerable says a great deal about the inversion of values in the modern necropolis. In Chicago children play in cemeteries, cyclists ride there and lovers kiss. What architect would dare to draw inspiration from the truth of the contemporary urban set-up and form a conception of a city on the basis of cemeteries, waste ground and ‘accursed’ spaces? This would truly be the death of architecture. 4. Heresies always put this ‘Kingdom of the Beyond’ in question to establish the Kingdom of God hic et nunc. To deny the doubling of life and survival, to deny the next world, is also to deny the rupture with the dead and therefore the necessity of crossing over via an intermediary agency to establish trade with them. This is the end of the Church and its power. 5. God keeps the signifier and the signified, good and evil, apart, He also separates man and woman, the living and the dead, the body and the mind, the Other and the Same, etc. More generally, it is He who maintains the split between the poles of every distinct opposition, and therefore between the inferior and the superior, Black and White. As soon as reason becomes political, that is to say, as soon as the distinct opposition is resolved as power and leans in the interests of one of these terms, God is already on this side. 6. [tient la barre: ‘at the helm’ – tr.] 7. For us, by contrast, everything which is symbolically exchanged constitutes a mortal danger for the dominant order. 8. There is therefore no distinction on the symbolic plane between the living and the dead. The dead have a different status, that is all, which requires certain ritual precautions. But visible and invisible do not exclude each other since they are two possible states of a person. Death is an aspect of life. The Canaque arriving in Sydney for the first time, stupefied by the crowds, soon explains the thing by the fact that in this country the dead walk amongst the living, which is nothing strange. ‘Do Kamo’, for the Canaques (Maurice Leenhardt, Do Kamo: Person and Myth in the Melanesian World [tr. Basia Miller Gulati, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979] ), is that ‘which lives’, and everyone may belong to this category. There again the living/non-living is a distinctive opposition that we alone make, and we base all our ‘science’ and our operational violence on it. Science, technics and production assume this rupture of the living and the non-living, privileging the living on which alone science in all its rigour is based (cf. J. Monod, Chance and Necessity). Even the ‘reality’ of science and technics is also the separation of the living and the dead. The very finality of science as a pulsion, as the death drive (the desire to know), is inscribed in this disjunction, so that an object is only real insofar as it is dead, that is, relegated to inert and indifferent objectivity, as were initially, above everything else, the dead and the living. By contrast, the primitives were not plunged, as we like to say so much, into ‘animism’, that is, into the idealism of the living, into the irrational magic of forces: they privilege neither one term nor the other, for the simple reason that they do not make this distinction. 9. This rule also applies in the political sphere. Thus the peoples of the Third World (Arabs, Blacks and Indians) act as Western culture’s imaginary (as much an object or support of racism as the support of revolutionary aspirations). On the other hand, we, the technolog- ical and industrial West, are their imaginary, what they dream of in their separation. This is the basis of the reality of global domination. 10. Of course, the psychoanalytic (Lacanian) real is no longer given as substance, nor as a positive reference: it is the always lost object that cannot be located, and of which there is nothing ultimately to say. A delimited absence in the network of the ‘symbolic order’, this real retains however the charm of a game of hide-and-seek with the signifier which traces after it. From the representation to the trace, the real is effaced – not entirely, however. There is all the difference between an unconscious topology and utopia. Utopia puts an end to the real, even as absence or lack. 209 Political Economy and Death At least in Lacan there is something other than the idealist misinterpretation of Lévi- Strauss, for whom, in his Structural Anthropology [2 vols, tr. M. Layton, Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1977–9], ‘the function of the symbolic universe is to resolve on the ideal plane what is experienced as contradictory on the real plane’. Here (not too far from its most degraded sense), the symbolic appears as a sort of ideal compensation function, mediating between the separation of the real and ideal. In fact, the symbolic is quite simply reduced to the imaginary. 11. On the other hand, whoever cannot be given also dies, or falls to the necessity of selling themselves. This is where prostitution takes hold, as the residue of gift-exchange and the first form of economic exchange. Even though the prostitute’s wages were initially, in the ancient context, a ‘sacrificial wage’, it inaugurates the possibility of another type of exchange. 12. Cf. also M. Leenhardt: There is no idea of nothingness in death. The Canaque does not mistake the idea of death for that of nothingness. Perhaps we may find in their term sèri an idea similar to our ‘nothingness’. Sèri indicates the situation of the bewitched or cursed man who has been abandoned by his ancestors, the baos, a man in perdition, out of soci- ety. He feels himself non-existent and suffers a veritable ruin. For him ‘nothingness’ is, at most, a social negation and is not a part of the idea he has of death. (Do Kamo, p. 35) 13. Such societies are consequently less psychotic than our modern societies (for which we politely reserve the qualification ‘neurotic’, but which are in fact in the process of becom- ing ‘psychotic’ according to our own definition, that is, they are in the process of a total loss of access to the symbolic). 14. Because the ‘social’ itself does not exist in ‘primitive societies’. The term ‘primitive’ has been eliminated today, but we must also eliminate the equally ethnocentric term ‘society’. 15. Cf. the cannibalism scene in Jean de Lhéry’s Les Indiens de la Renaissance. 16. On this point see René Girard, Violence and the Sacred [tr. Patrick Gregory, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1979]. 17. Just like Jaulin (La Mart Sara) on the primitive fear of the dead: ‘By lending anti-social intentions to the forces of death, the Sara have merely logically extended some very broad observations and, at the same time, several unconscious givens.’ It is not at all certain that these unconscious ‘givens’ have much to do with this. The haunting and the negativity of the forces of death might well be explained as the menacing agency and the immanence of these wandering forces as soon as they escape from the group, where they can no longer be exchanged. ‘The dead man’, in fact, ‘avenges himself.’ But the hostile double, the hostile dead man, is repeatedly incarnated in the group’s failure to preserve his material in symbolic exchange, to repatriate, through an appro- priate ritual, this ‘nature’ that escapes with the dead man and which then cyrstallises into a malefic instance. This nevertheless leaves his relation with the group intact: he exercises it in the form of persecution (the dead labour frozen within capital plays the same role for us). This has nothing to do with a superegoic projection or an unconscious apparatus issuing from the depths of the species … 18. The neo-millennialism of the liberation of the unconscious should not be analysed as a distortion of psychoanalysis: it follows logically from the imaginary resurrection of the lost object (objet petit ‘a’) that psychoanalysis buried at the core of its theory: the always unlocatable real which allows it to guard the gates to the symbolic. The objet petit ‘a’ is in fact the true mirror of Desire, and, at the same time, the mirror of psychoanalysis. 19. Science itself is cumulative only because it is half bound up with death, because it heaps death upon death. 20. In times past, however, there had already existed another individual and pessimistic thought of death: the Stoics’ aristocratic, pre-Christian thought was also bound up with the conception of a personal solitude in death in a culture where collective myths were collapsing. The same emphases are also found in Montaigne and Pascal, in the feudal lord or the Jansenist of noblesse de robe (the ennobled bourgeoisie), in humanist resignation or desperate Christianity. This, however, marks the beginning of the modern anguish of death. Symbolic Exchange and Death210 21. In this respect, there is no difference between atheist materialism and Christian idealism, for they part company only on the question of the afterlife (but whether or not there is anything after death has no importance: ‘that is not the question’ [in English in the origi- nal – tr.] ), they agree on the basic principle: life is life, and death is always death; that is, they share the will to keep them scrupulously at a distance from each other. 22. The Christian dialectic of death epitomises and puts an end to Pascal’s formula: ‘It is important for all life to know whether the soul is mortal or immortal’, is succeeded by humanist thinking, a rationalist mastery over death. In the West, this has been drawn on from the Stoics and the Epicureans (Montaigne – the denegation of death – benign or cold serenity), up to the eighteenth century and Feuerbach: ‘Death is a phantom, a chi- mera, since it exists only when it does not exist.’ The staging of reason never results in an excess of life, nor in an enthusiastic sense of death: humanism seeks a natural reason for death, a wisdom backed up by science and the Enlightenment thinkers. Dialectical reason – death as negativity and the movement of becoming – succeeds this formal and rationalist overcoming of death. The beautiful dialectic follows the upward mobility of political economy. The dialectic then breaks down to make room for the irreducibility of death and its insurmountable immanence (Kierkegaard). With Heidegger, dialectical reason falls into ruin, taking a subjective and irrational turn towards a metaphysics of despair and the absurd which, however, does not prevent it from continuing to be the dialectic of a con- scious subject finding a paradoxical freedom in it: ‘Everything is permitted, since death is insurmountable’ (quia absurdum: Pascal was not so far from the modern pathos of death). Camus: ‘The absurd man fixes death with an impassioned stare; this fascination liberates him.’ The anguish of death as a test of truth. Human life as being-towards-death. Heidegger: ‘Authentic being-towards-death – that is to say, the finitude of temporality – is the hidden basis of Dasein’s historicality’ (Being and Time [tr. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson, Oxford: Blackwell, 1978], §74, p. 438). Death as ‘authenticity’: there is in this, in relation to a system that is itself mortifying, a vertiginous escalation, a challenge which is in fact a profound obedience. The terrorism of authenticity through death remains a secondary process in that, by means of dialectical acrobatics, consciousness recuperates its ‘finitude’ as destiny. Anxiety as the reality principle and as ‘freedom’ remains the imaginary which, in its contemporary phase, has substituted the mirror of death for that of immortality. But all this remains extremely Christian and is moreover constantly mixed up with ‘existential’ Christianity. Revolutionary thought, for its part, oscillates between the dialecticisation of death as negativity, and the rationalist objective of the abolition of death: to put an end to it as a ‘reactionary’ obstacle in solidarity with capital, with the help of science and technics, en route to the immortality of generic man, beyond history, in communism. Death, like so many other things, is only a superstructure, whose exit will be governed by the revolution of the infrastructure. 23. There is a great risk of confusion here, for if we acknowledge that death and sexuality are biologically intertwined in the organic destiny of complex beings, this has nothing to do with the symbolic relation of death and sex. The first is inscribed in the positivity of the genetic code, the second in the destruction of social codes. Or rather, the second has no biological equivalent inscribed anywhere, whether in a code or in language. It is play, chal- lenge and intense pleasure [jouissance] as it mockingly thwarts the former. Between the two, between the real relation of death and sexuality and their symbolic relation, there passes the caesura of exchange, a social destiny where everything plays. Weissman: soma is mortal, plasma germinative and immortal. Protozoa are virtually immortal, death arising only with differentiated metazoa for whom death becomes pos- sible and even rational (the unlimited duration of an individual life becomes a useless luxury. For Bataille, death on the contrary becomes an ‘irrational’ luxury). Death is only a late acquisition of living beings. In the history of the species of living creatures, it appears along with sexuality. 211 Political Economy and Death So also Tournier in Friday or the Other Island ( [tr. Norman Denny, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984], pp. 106–7): Sex and death. Their close association … he insisted that this was a sacrifice of the individual to the species, since in the act of procreation the individual loses some- thing of his substance. Thus sexuality is the living presence, ominous and mortal, of the species in the essence of the individual. To procreate is to bring forth a new generation which innocently and inexorably will thrust its predecessor towards extinction. … The instinct which brings the sexes together is then an instinct of death. But Nature has thought it prudent to disguise her stratagem, transparent though it is, and what appears to be the self-indulgence of lovers is in reality a course of mad self-abnegation. This fable is accurate, but demonstrates only the correlation between biological sex and death: in fact, death’s decree appears along with sexuality, since the latter is already the inscription of a functional distribution, and therefore is immediately of a repressive order. But this functional distribution is not of the order of the pulsion; it is social. It appeared in a certain type of social relation. Savages do not make sexuality autonomous like we do; they are closer to what Bataille describes: ‘Through the activity of organs in a flow of coa- lescence and renewal, like the ebb and flow of waves …, the self is dispossessed’ (Eroticism [2nd edn, tr. M. Dalwood, London: Marion Boyars, 1987], p. 18). 24. In fact, Bataille’s vision ‘of excess’ often falls into the trap of transgression, a fundamen- tally Christian dialectics or mysticism (but shared by contemporary psychoanalysis and by every ‘libertarian’ ideology of the festival and release [défoulement] ) of the prohibition and transgression. We have made the festival into an aesthetics of transgression, because our entire culture is one of prohibition. Repression still marks the idea of the festival, which by the same token may be accused of reactivating the prohibition and reinforcing the social order. We treat the primitive feast to the same analysis since we are basically incapable of imagining anything other than the bar, its on-this-side and its beyond, which again issues from our fundamental schema of an uninterrupted linear order (the ‘good form’ which culture excludes is always that of the end, of a final fulfilment). Like the sacrifice, the primitive feast is not a transgression but a reversal, a cyclical revolution. This is the only form that puts an end to the bar and its prohibitions. The inverse order of the transgression or ‘liberation’ of repressed energies simply ends up in a compulsion to repeat the prohibition. Thus only reversibility and the cycle are in excess; transgression remains by default. ‘In the economic order, all production is reproduction; in the symbolic order, all reproduction is production.’ 25. It is, moreover, curious to see how, technically, death becomes increasingly undecidable for science itself: heart failure, then a level encephalogram; but then what? There is no longer any objective progress here: something of the indeterminacy and undecidability of death in the heart of science itself is reflected on the symbolic plane. 26. To the point that it is sufficient that certain political groups demand some accident or assassination attempt of unknown origin: this is their only ‘practice’, transforming chance into subversion. 27. Since today this contractual demand is addressed to social authorities, whereas before one signed pacts with the Devil to prolong, enrich and enjoy one’s life. The same contract, and the same trap: the Devil always wins. 28. This is more important than the maximal exploitation of the labour force. This can clearly be seen in the case of the elderly: they are no longer exploited (if they are allowed to live on the fruits of society) if they are forced to live, since they are the living example of the accumulation of life (as opposed to its consumption). Society supports them as models of the use-value of life, accumulation and saving. This is precisely why they no longer have any symbolic presence in our society. 29. It only becomes the object of a passion again if it can be imputed to a person (a particular capitalist or a particular business personified), and is therefore experienced once again as crime and sacrifice. Symbolic Exchange and Death212 30. Contrary to what is generally thought, human sacrifices succeeded animal sacrifice to the extent that the animal lost its magical pre-eminence, and the man-king succeeded the animal-totem as worthy of the sacrificial function. The more recent substitutive sacrifice of the animal has a very different meaning. 31. Hence in the past prisoners of war were spared in order to be used as slaves. No longer worthy of potlach and sacrifice, they were condemned to the lowliest role and to a slow death from labour. 32. But when and why did this death cease to be a sacrifice and become a torture? When did it cease to be a form of torture to become an execution, as it is for us? There is no history of death and the death penalty: there is only a genealogy of the social configurations to provide death with meaning. 33. The same liberal policy change took place, at another level, in England in 1830, where they wanted to replace the executioner with a preventative regular police force. The English prefer the executioner to the regular police force. And in fact the police, established in order to reduce the violence being wrought on the citizens, quite sim- ply took over from crime in wreaking this violence against the citizen. In time, it revealed itself to be much more repressive and dangerous for the citizen than crime itself. Here again, overt and selective repression metamorphoses into generalised preventative repression. 34. Hence the meaning of the famous formula, ‘We are all German Jews’ (but also, ‘we are all Indians, Blacks, Palestinians, women or homosexuals’). From the moment that the repression of difference was no longer carried out by extermination, but by absorption into the repressive equivalence and universality of the social, we are all different and repressed. There are no more detainees in a society that has invented ‘open’ prisons, just as there are no more survivors in a society that claims to abolish death. In this retali- atory contamination, the omnipotence of the symbolic order can be read: the unreal basis of the separations and the lines traced by power. Hence the power of this par- ticular formula – We are all German Jews – in that rather than expressing an abstract solidarity (of the type ‘all together for … we are all united behind this or that… forward with the proletariat’, etc.), it expresses the inexorable fact of the symbolic reciprocity between a society and those it excludes. In a single movement it falls into line with them as radical difference. This is how it captured something fundamental in May ’68, whereas other slogans were mere political cant. 35. For in this will to abolish death, which is the project of political economy, the uncon- scious, by a curious reversal (‘that which knows no death’ is the death drive), starts to play an important role. It becomes the referential discourse of the thesis of the criminal’s irresponsibility (crime as acting out). It is well versed in the defence dossier as an explan- atory system. The unconscious plays a decisive role today in rationalist progressivist and humanist thought: it has indeed fallen on hard times. And in this way, psychoanalysis also enters (without willing it?) ideology. The unconscious, however, would have had many other things to say about death if it had not learnt to speak the system’s language: quite simply, it used to say that death did not exist, or, rather, that to abolish death was a phan- tasm that itself originates from the depths and repression of death. Instead of this, today it serves only as evidence, to our social idealists, of irresponsibility and justifies their moral discourse: life is a good, and death is an evil. In its violent classical phase, which even today coincides with conservative thought, capital plays on the discourse of conscious psychology and responsibility, and there- fore repression: this is the terrorist discourse of capitalism. In its more advanced phase, which coincides with progressive, even revolutionary thought, neo-capitalism plays on the discourse of psychoanalysis: unconscious, irresponsibility, tolerance and reform. Consciousness and responsibility are the normative discourse of capital. The unconscious is the liberal discourse of neo-capitalism. 36. In 1819, under pressure from even the entrepreneurs and proprietors, and because the penal machine was jammed by the courts being too severe with the death penalty (jurors had the stark choice between the death penalty and acquittal), the death penalty was 213 Political Economy and Death abolished in a hundred or so cases (England). Its abolition therefore corresponds to a rational adaptation, to an increasing efficiency of the penal system. Koestler: Our capital punishment is not the inheritance of the butchery of the Dark Ages. It has its own history. It is the residue of a jurisdiction which is contemporary with the development of political economy, and whose fiercest period – the Bloody Code in nineteenth century England – coincides with the industrial revolution. Medieval custom reserved death for a few particularly serious offences. Bound to the increasingly imperious defence of the right to private property, the curve began to rise through the height of the nineteenth and up to the twentieth cen- turies. (‘The “bloody code” ‘, in Reflections on Hanging [London: Gollancz, 1956], pp. 13ff. [Baudrillard has paraphrased and summarised rather than cited Koestler here. – tr.]) This curve, then, also charts the ascendancy of the capitalist bourgeois class. And its recession after 1850 is the effect not of absolute human progress, but that of the cap- italist system. 37. Of the type: ‘The state is led to multiply very real murders in order to avoid an unknown murder. It will never know if whether this murder has any chance of being perpetrated’ (Camus, Sur la peine capitale). This play on logic, seeking to place the system in contra- diction with itself, leads liberal humanism directly to abject compromise: ‘The abolition of the death penalty must be demanded both for reasons of logic and realism(!)’ (ibid.). ‘In the last resort, the death penalty is bad because, by its very nature, it rules out any possibility of making punishment and responsibility proportionate’ (Koestler, The “bloody code”’); this was already the reason that the English capitalists had demanded its abolition in 1820! The liberal argument is: terror goes against its own ends; a scale of well administered penalties, of ‘minimal punishment’, is both ‘more humane and more effective(!)’ The equivalence of the human and the effective has a long history in humanist thought. 38. It’s not so simple however, since the subject can still invoke violent death, death ‘from the outside’ – an accident, suicide or a bomb – to avoid putting his ‘natural’ immortality into question. The ultimate subterfuge, the ultimate ruse of the ego that may lead the subject to the opposite extreme, to seek an ‘absurd’ death in order to better safeguard his immortal principle. 39. [CRS – Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité: the French riot police – tr.] 40. Cryogenic freezing, or being sealed in a gel so as to be resurrected, is the limit-form of this practice. 41. Just as much by simply devouring the body: in this sense, cannibalising the dead is itself a semiurgic activity (the idea that is always put forward is that through cannibal- ism ‘one assimilates the forces of the dead’: this is a secondary magical discourse for both the primitive and the ethnologist. It is not a question of force, that is to say, of a natural surplus or potential; on the contrary, it is a question of signs, that is to say, of preserving the sign’s potential against every natural process, against the devastations of nature). 42. For the Dangaleat (Jean Pouillon, Nouvelle Revue de Psychoanalyse, no. 1, 1967), disease had an initiatory value. One must have been sick in order to become part of the group. One only becomes a doctor if one has been sick, and by the very fact of having been so. Disease comes from the margaï, each has their own margaï or margaïs, which they inherit from father to son. Every social position is acquired thanks to disease, which is a sign of election. Disease is a mark, a meaning – the normal man goes his own way, he islinsignificant. Disease is culture, the source of value and the principle of social organisation. Even where disease does not have this determinant social function, it is always a social matter, a social crisis, socially and publically resolved, by reactivating the whole social metabolism through the extraordinary relation between the doctor and the sick man, and setting it to work. This is radically different from contemporary med- ical practice, where the illness is individually borne and therapy individually applied. Symbolic Exchange and Death214 The reciprocity and exchange of the illness is preponderant in primitive societies. Illness is a social relation, like labour, etc. Organic causality can be recognised and treated by all sorts of means; the illness itself is never conceived as an organic lesion, but in the last instance as the rupture and breakdown of social exchange. The organic is a metaphor: it will therefore be treated ‘metaphorically’ by the symbolic operation of social exchange through the two protagonists in the cure. The two are always three in other contexts: the group is immanent to the cure, at once the operator and the stakes of ‘symbolic efficacy’. In short, the doctor and the sick are redistributed around the illness as social relation, instead, as is the case for us, of making the illness autonomous as an organic relation with its objective causality, doctor and patient each becoming objectified as passive and active, patient or specialist. 6 The Extermination of the Name of God The Anagram The model of a symbolic exchange also exists within the field of language, something like the core of a political anti-economy, a site of the extermina- tion of value and the law: poetic language. In the field of an anti-discourse, a beyond of the political economy of language, Saussure’s Anagrams consti- tute the fundamental discovery. The same discovery that will later lend its conceptual arms to linguistic science had previously, in his Cahiers d’ana- grammes, brought out the antagonistic character of a non-expressive lan- guage, beyond the laws, axioms and finalities assigned it by linguistics, in the form of a symbolic operation of language, that is to say, not a structural oper- ation of representation by signs, but exactly the opposite, the deconstruction of the sign and representation. The principle of poetic functioning proclaimed by Saussure does not claim to be revolutionary. Only the passion he puts into establishing this principle as the recognised and conscious structure of remote, Vedic, Germanic and saturnine texts, and establishing its proof, is proportionate to the incredible scope of his hypothesis. He himself draws no radical or crit- ical consequences from it, he does not care for one moment to generalise it on a speculative level, and when he failed to find this proof, he aban- doned this revolutionary intuition and went on to the edification of linguistic science. It is perhaps only today, at the term of half a century of uninterrupted development in this science, that we can draw out the con- sequences of the hypothesis Saussure abandoned, 1 and investigate to what extent it lays the advance foundations for a decentring of all linguistics. The rules of the poetic proclaimed by Saussure are the following.2 The Law of the Coupling 1. ‘A vowel has no right to figure within the Saturnine unless it has its counter-vowel in some other place in the verse (to ascertain the identical vowel, without attention to quantity). The result of this is that if the verse has an even number of syllables, the vowels couple up exactly, and must always have a remainder of zero, with an even total for each type of vowel.’ 2. The law of consonants is identical, and no less strict: there is always an even number of any consonant whatever. Symbolic Exchange and Death216 3. He goes so far as to say that if there is an irreducible remainder either of vowels (unpaired verse) or consonants, then, contrary to what we might think, this does not escape condemnation even if it is a matter of a simple ‘e’: we will then see it reappear in the follow- ing verse, as a new remainder corresponding to the overspill from the preceding one. The Law of the Theme-word In the composition of the verse, the poet sets the phonemic material provided by the theme-word to work. One (or sev- eral) verse(s) contain(s) anagrams of a single word (in general a proper name, of a god or a hero) by being constrained to reproduce itself, especially in a vocal rendition, ‘on hearing one or two Latin Saturnine verses, F. de Saussure heard the principal phonemes of a proper name become clearer and clearer’ (Starobinski, Les mots, p. 28). Saussure writes: In the hypogram, it is a matter of emphasising a name or a word, striving to repeat its syllables and thus giving it a second, artificial way of being, added, so to speak, to the original being of the word. TAURASIA CISAUNA SAMNI0 CEPIT (SCIPIO) AASEN ARGALEON ANEMON AMEGARTOS AUTME (AGAMEMNON) These simple rules are repeated untiringly in multiple variants. As regards alliteration, the rule to which it used to be thought we were able to submit all ancient poetry, Saussure says that it is only one aspect ‘of an otherwise vast and important phenomenon’, given that ‘all syllables alliterate, or assonate, or are combined in some other phonemic harmony’. Phonemic groups ‘become echoes’, entire verses to be anagrams of other preceding verses, however far off, in the text. … [P]olyphonies visually reproduce, when the occasion arises, the sylla- bles of an important word or name, whether they figure in the text or present themselves naturally to the mind through the context. … [P]oetry analyses the phonemic substances of words, whether to turn them into accoustic series or signifying [significative] series when one alludes to a certain name [the anagrammatised word – J.B.]. [In short,] everything is answered, in one way or another, within the verse … whether the signifiers or the phonemes answer one another throughout the verse, or the hidden signified, the theme-word, is echoed from one polyph- ony to the other, ‘beneath’ the ‘manifest’ text. Moreover, both rules can co-exist: Sometimes conjointly with anaphony, sometimes beyond every word we imi- tate, there is a correspondence of all the elements, translating into an exact ‘coupling’, that is to say, a repetition as a pair of even numbers. Saussure will hesitate between the terms of ‘anagram’, ‘antigram’, ‘hypogram’, ‘paragram’ and ‘paratext’ to designate ‘the elaborate variation that allows the perspicacious reader to perceive the evident but dispersed presence of 217 The Extermination of the Name of God conducting phonemes’ (Starobinski, Les mots, p. 33). We could, as an exten- sion of Saussure’s work, propose the term ‘ANATHEMA’, which is originally the equivalent of an ex-voto, of a votive offering: the divine name running beneath the text, and to whom the text is consecrated, the name of he who consecrates and to whom it is consecrated.3 These two laws appear to say extremely little as regards what we could say about the ‘essence’ of the poetic. Furthermore, they take no account of the poetic ‘effect’, of the enjoyment [jouissance] proper to texts, or of their aesthetic ‘value’ Saussure has only considered the poet’s ‘inspiration’, not the reader’s ecstasy. Perhaps he would never even have claimed that there was any relation whatsoever between the rules he clarifies (he thought he observed them, and that’s all there is to it) and the exceptional intensity it has always been agreed that we find in poetry. By limiting his perspective to a formal logic of the signifier, he seems to leave the concern with looking for poetic enjoyment of the wealth of the signified and the profundity of expression to others who, with one accord, have always done so (psycholo- gists, linguists and the poets themselves). Saussure, however, and Saussure alone, tells us that the enjoyment derived from the poetic is enjoyment in that it shatters ‘the fundamental laws of the human word’. Linguists become refugees in the face of this subversion of their discipline, in an untenable paradox. They acknowledge, with Roman Jakobson, that the poetic anagram cuts across the two laws of the human word as pro- claimed by Saussure, that of the codified bond between the signifier and its signified, and that of the linearity of signifiers. … (The means employed by poetic language are such that they make us take leave of the linear order …) [‘F. de Saussure sur les anagrammes’, in Selected Writings, Vol. 7, Berlin: Mouton, 1985, p. 247] (or, as Starobinski summarizes it, ‘we leave the consecutive temporal- ity proper to common language’ [Les mots, p. 47]), and simultaneously affirm that ‘Saussure’s researches open up unprecedented perspectives in the linguistic study of poetry’ [Jakobson, Selected Writings, Vol. 7, p. 246]. An elegant manner to recuperate the poetic as a particular field of discourse, on which linguistics retains the monopoly. What does it matter if the poetic denies the laws of signification, since we will neutralise it by giving it the keys to the city of linguistics, and by requiring it to obey the same reality principle? But what is a signified or a signifier if it is no lon- ger governed by the code of equivalence? What is a signifier if it is no longer governed by the law of linearity? And what is linguistics without all this? Nothing (but we will see the contortions it goes through in order to make amends for this violence). Linguistics gets out of Saussure’s first law (the coupling) by putting for- ward the redundancy of the signifier, or indeed the frequency with which a particular phoneme or polyphony occurs, which is greater than the average in ordinary language, etc.; it gets out of the second (properly anagrammatic) law by invoking the ‘latent’ name (Agamemnon) as the secondary signified of a text that inevitably ‘expresses’ or ‘represents’ it, conjointly with the Symbolic Exchange and Death218 ‘manifest’ signified (‘one and the same signifier splits into two signifieds’, says Jakobson [Selected Writings, Vol. 7, p. 247]) – a desperate attempt to save, even if it was through a more complex operation, the law of linguistic value and the essential categories of the mode of signification (signifier, signified, expression, representation, equivalence). The linguistic imaginary seeks to annex the poetic to itself and even claims to enrich poetics’ econ- omy of the term and value. But against it, and giving full scope to Saussure’s discovery, it must be said that, on the contrary, the poetic is a process of the extermination of value. The law of the poem is in fact to make sure, following a rigorous pro- ceedure, that nothing remains of it. This is why it contrasts sharply with the discourse of linguistics, which, for its part, is a process of the accumulation, production and distribution of language as value. The poetic is irreducible to the mode of signification, which is nothing other than the mode of pro- duction of the values of language. This is why it is irreducible to the linguistic, which is the science of this mode of production. The poetic is the insurrection of language against its own laws. Saussure himself never formulated this subversive consequence. Others, however, have accurately assessed the danger inherent in the simple formulation of another possible formulation of language. This is why they have all made to conceal this in accordance with their code (calculating the signifier as a term, and the signified as value). The Poetic as the Extermination of Value 1. Saussure’s first law, that of the coupling, is in no way, as he himself insists, that of the unlimited expressive alliteration or redundancy of some phoneme or other. Pour qui sont ces serpents qui sifflent sur nos têtes? [For whom are these snakes whistling over our heads?] These serpents are the rattlesnakes of a linguistics of the recurrence and accumulation of the signified: s-s-s-s- ‘ÇA’ [ID] also whistles in the signifier, and the more ‘s’s there are, the more ça whistles, the more menacing it is and the better it ‘expresses’. Thus again: … the faint fresh flame of the young year flushes from leaf to flower and flower to fruit … ‘In Swinburne’s lines’, says Ivan Fonagy, ‘we feel the breeze passing, without the poem expressly mentioning it’ (‘Form and Function in Poetic Language’, Diogène, 51, 1965, p. 90). Saussure’s coupling is a calculated, conscious and rigorous duplication which refers to another status of repetition, not as the accumulation of terms, as the accumulative or alliterative (com)pulsion, but as the cyclical cancellation of terms, two by two, the extermination of doubling by the cycle. 219 The Extermination of the Name of God Vowels always couple up exactly, AND MUST ALWAYS GIVE A REMAINDER OF ZERO. (Saussure cited in Starobinski, Les mots, p. 21) And in the emblematic citation that he gives this law – NUMERO DEUS PARI GAUDET (‘God rejoices in even numbers’) – it is said that in one way or another, enjoyment is inseparable not from amassing the Same, reinforc- ing meaning by the addition of the Same, but quite the contrary, from its cancellation by the double, by the cycle of the anti-vowel or the anti-gram where the phonematic character comes to be cancelled as if in a mirror. 2. Saussure’s second law, which concerns the theme-word or the ‘anathema’ that runs through the text, must be analysed in the same way. It must be seen that it is not at all a matter of repeating the original signifier or reproducing its phonematic components throughout a text. ‘Aasen argaleôn anemôn amegartos autmè’ does not ‘reproduce’ Agamemnon even though Saussure is ambiguous on this point. He says: In the hypogram, it is a question of emphasising a name, a word, striving to repeat its syllables and thus giving it a second, artificial way of being added, so to speak, to the original being of the word. In fact, the theme-word is diffracted throughout the text. In a way, it is ‘analysed’ by the verse or the poem, reduced to its simple elements, decomposed like the light spectrum, whose diffracted rays then sweep across the text. In other words then, the original corpus is dispersed into ‘partial objects’. It is therefore a matter not of another manner of being the Same, of reiteration or paraphrase, of a clandestine avatar of the origi- nal name of God, but rather of an explosion, a dispersion, a dismembering where this name is annihilated. Not an ‘artificial double’ (what use is this unless it is in order to be reduced to the same thing?), but a dismembered double, a body torn limb from limb like Osiris and Orpheus. Far from reinforcing the signifier in its being, repeating it positively, this metamor- phosis of its scattered members is equivalent to its death as such, to its annihilation. To sum it up, this is, on the level of the signifier, of the name it incarnates, the equivalent of putting God or a hero to death in the sacrifice. Following this, the animal totem, the god or the hero circulate, disarticu- lated, disintegrated by its death in the sacrifice (eventually torn limb from limb and eaten), as the symbolic material of the group’s integration. The name of God, torn limb from limb, dispersed into its phonemic elements as the signifier, is put to death, haunts the poem and rearticulates it in the rhythm of its fragments, without ever being reconstituted in it as such. The symbolic act never consists in the reconstitution of the name of God after a detour and analytic breakdown within the poem; the symbolic act never consists of the resurrection of the signifier. Starobinski is wrong when he says: It will be a matter of reassembling the principal syllables, as Isis reunited Orpheus’ dismembered body. Symbolic Exchange and Death220 Lacan gets his theory of symbolism wrong when he says: If man finds himself open to desiring as many others within himself as his mem- bers have names other than his, if he is to recognise as many disjointed members, lost without ever having been a unity, as there are beings that are metaphors of these members, we can also see that the question of ascertaining the epistemo- logical value of these symbols has been resolved, since these are the very members that return to him after wandering through the world in an alienated fashion. (La psychanalyse, Vol. V, 1960, p. 15) The symbolic act is never in this ‘return’, in this retotalisation that fol- lows alienation, in this resurrection of an identity; on the contrary, it is always in the volatilisation of the name, the signifier, in the extermination of the term, disappearance with no return. This is what makes possible the intense circulation on the interior of the poem (also in the primitive group on the occasion of feasting and sacrifice), this is what gives enjoy- ment a language, and, again, one from which nothing results nor remains. The entire pack of linguistic categories cannot do too much to efface the scandal of the loss and death of the signifer in this feverish agitation of language which, as Bataille says concerning life, ‘demands that death exert its ravages at its expense’. Here, of course, the limits Saussure imposes on himself explode. This poetic principle is not only applicable to Vedic, Germanic or Latin poetry, and it is pointless to seek, as he did, for a hypothetical generalisation of the proof of this. It is obvious that modern poets have never made use of the generative theme-word, if ever the ancient poets did. But this is not an objection since it is clear that, for all languages and all epochs, the form Saussure distinguished is sovereign. It is clear to all – enjoyment bears wit- ness to this – that a good poem is one where nothing is left over, where all the phonemic material in use is consumed; and that, on the other hand, a bad poem (or ‘not-poetry-at-all’) is one where there is a remainder, where not every significant phoneme, diphoneme, syllable or term has been seized by its double, where not every term has been volatilised and consumed in a rigorous reciprocity (or antagonism), as in primitive gift-exchange, where we feel the weight of the remainder that has not found its corresponding term, nor therefore its death and absolution, which has not been success- fully exchanged in the very operation of the text: it is in proportion to this residue that we know that a poem is bad, that it is the slag of discourse, something which has not exploded, which has been neither lost nor con- sumed in the festival of reversible speech. Value is residue. It is the discourse of signification, our language governed by linguistics. The economy of signification and communication, where we produce and exchange terms and meaning-values, under the law of the code, rests on everything that has not been seized by the symbolic operation of language, by symbolic extermination. The economic process is inaugurated in the same way: what re-enters the circuits of accumulation and value is what remains from sacrificial con- sumption, what has not been exhausted in the incessant cycle of the gift 221 The Extermination of the Name of God and the counter-gift. It is this remainder that we accumulate, we speculate on the rest, and here the birth of the economic begins. We can distinguish a third dimension of our mode of signification from the notion of the remainder. We know that the poetic operation ‘shatters the fundamental laws of language’: 1. The signifier–signified equivalence. 2. The linearity of the signifier (Saussure: ‘In linguistics, we should not, due to its being obvious, lightly disregard the truth that the elements of a word follow each other, since, on the contrary, it provides in advance the central principle of all useful reflection on words.’) 3. The third dimension, never really taken into account, and strictly interdependent with the two others, is that of the boundlessness, the limitless production of signifying material. Just as equivalence defines a dimension of the economic (that of unlimited productivity, the infinite reproduction of value), so the signifier–signified equivalence defines an unlimited field of discursivity. We no longer even see this proliferation of our discursive customs, it becomes so ‘natural’ to us, but it is what distinguishes us from all other cultures. We use and abuse words, phonemes and signifiers with no ritual, religious or poetic restriction of any kind, in total ‘freedom’, with no respon- sibility as regards the immense ‘material’ that we produce as we please. Everyone is free to endlessly use and endlessly draw on phonemic material in the name of what they want to ‘express’ and with the sole consideration of what they have to say. This ‘freedom’ of discourse, the possibility of tak- ing it and using it without ever returning it, answering to it, nor sacrificing even a share of one’s goods to it, as the primitives used to in order to ensure its symbolic reproduction; the idea of language as an all purpose medium of an inexhaustible nature, like a place where the utopia of political economy would be realised: ‘to each according to his needs’; this phantasm of an unprecedented stock, a raw material that would be magically reproduced in exact proportion to its use (no need even for primitive accumulation), and therefore the freedom of a fantastic wastage, is the exact status of our discursive communication, a staggering availability of signifying material. All this is thinkable only in a general configuration where the same princi- ples govern the reproduction of both material goods and the species itself. A mutation runs simultaneously through social formations where material goods, the number of individuals and the proliferation of words are, in a more or less rigorous fashion, distributed, limited and controlled inside a symbolic cycle, and our ‘modern’ social formations, which are distinguished by an infinite productivity, as economic as it is linguistic and demographic. These societies are caught in an endless escalation at every level: material accumulation, linguistic expression, and the proliferation of the species.4 This model of productivity (exponential growth, galloping demograph- ics, unlimited discursivity) must be simultaneously analysed everywhere. On the plane of language, which is alone in question here, it is clear that Symbolic Exchange and Death222 the unrestrained freedom to use phonemes in unlimited number for pur- poses of expression, without the reverse processes of cancellation, expiation, reabsorption or destruction (it does not matter which term), is radically opposed by the simple law announced by Saussure, that in poetry a vowel, a consonant or a syllable cannot be uttered without being doubled, that is to say, somehow exorcised, without fulfilling itself in the repetition that cancels it. From that point on, there is no question of unlimited use. The poetic, like symbolic exchange, brings into play a strictly limited and distributed cor- pus, but it undertakes to reach the end of it, whereas our economy of discourse implements an unlimited corpus that cares nothing for resolution. What becomes of words and phonemes in our discursive system? We should not think that they graciously disappear as soon as they have served their purpose, nor that they return somewhere, like the characters on a Linotype matrix, and wait until the next time they are used. Again, this is part of our idealist conception of language. Every term or phoneme not taken back, not returned, not volatilised by poetic doubling, not extermi- nated as a term and as a value (in its equivalence to what it ‘meant’ or ‘wanted to say’), remains. It is a residue. It will return to a fantastic sedi- mentation of waste, of opaque discursive material. (We begin to perceive that the essential problem of a productive civilisation may be that of its waste, which is nothing other than the problem of its own death: giving way under its own remains. Industrial leftovers are nothing, however, in rela- tion to the remains of language.) Such as it is, our culture is haunted and jammed by this gigantic, petrified, residual instance: by means of an esca- lation of language it attempts to reduce a tendential decline in the rate of ‘communication’. Nothing happens. Just as every commodity, that is to say, everything produced under the sign of the law of value and equivalence, is an irreducible residue that comes to bar social relations, so every word, every term and every phoneme produced and not symbolically destroyed accumulates like the repressed, weighs down on us with all the abstraction of dead language. An economy of profusion and wastage rules over our language: the afflu- ent utopia. But although ‘affluence’ and wastage are recent characteristics of the material economy, an historical trait, they appear to be a natural dimension, always already given, of spoken or written language. There is and will always be, at every instant, a utopia, insofar as we will want it for the whole world – the utopia of an unlimited capital of language as use- and exchange-value. In order to signify, everyone proceeds by the accumulation and cumulative exchange of signifiers whose truth lies elsewhere, in the equivalence to what they want to say (one can say it in fewer words: con- cision is a moral virtue, but this is only ever an economy of means). This discursive ‘consumption’, over which the spectre of penury never hangs, this wasteful manipulation, sustained by the imaginary of profusion, results in a prodigious inflation that leaves, in the image of our societies of uncon- trolled growth, an equally prodigious residue, a non-degradable waste of 223 The Extermination of the Name of God consummated, but never entirely consumed, signifiers. For used words are not volatilised, they accumulate like waste – a sign pollution as fantastic as, and contemporary with, industrial pollution. Linguistics seized the stage of the waste product [déchet], the stage of a functional language that it universalises as the natural state of all language. It imagines no other: Just as the Romans and the Etruscans divided the sky by rigid mathematical lines, and in this way delimited space as a templum and conjured up a God, so every people has above them such a sky divided up by mathematical concepts and, under the demand for truth, it intends that from now on every concep- tual God should be sought nowhere other than within this sphere. (Nietzsche, The Philosopher’s Book) This is what linguistics does: it forces language into an autonomous sphere in its own image, and feigns to have found it there ‘objectively’, when, from start to finish, it invented and rationalised it. It is incapable of imagining a state of language other than that of the combinatory abstraction of the code [langue] accompanied with an infinite manipulation of speech [parole]; in other words, speculation (in the double sense of the term) on the basis of general equivalence and free circulation; everyone using words as they please and exchanging them in accordance with the law of the code. But let’s suppose a stage where the signs of language were deliberately distributed (like money is for the Are-Are): restricted distribution, no for- mal ‘freedom’ of production, circulation or use. Or rather a double circuit: − the circuit of ‘liberated’ words, gratuitously useable, circulating as exchange-value; a zone of meaning ‘commerce’, analogous to the sphere of the gimwali in economic exchange; − the controlled circuit of a non-‘liberated’ zone, of a material restricted to symbolic use where words have neither use- nor exchange-value, and where they cannot be gratuitously multiplied nor uttered, analogous to the sphere of the kula for ‘precious’ goods. The general principle of equivalence does not operate in this sphere, nor therefore does the logical and rational articulation of the sign with which semio-linguistic ‘science’ is preoccupied. The poetic recreates the situation of primitive societies in linguistic material: a restricted corpus of objects whose uninterrupted circulation in the gift-exchange creates an inexhaustible wealth, a feast of exchange. Assessed by their volume or their value, primitive goods end up in an almost absolute penury. Tirelessly consumed in feasting and exchange, they recount, through their ‘minimal volume and number’, the ‘maximal energy of signs’ of which Nietzsche spoke, or the first and only genuine affluent society of which Marshall Sahlins spoke (Les temps modernes, Oct. 1968). Words here have the same status as objects or goods: they are not freely available to everybody, language has no ‘affluence’. In these magical and ritual formulations there reigns a restriction which alone preserves the symbolic efficacity of signs. The shaman and the prophet (Vates) act on considered, Symbolic Exchange and Death224 coded and limited phonemes or formulae, exhausting them in a maximal configuration of meaning. So the formula is pronounced, in its literal and rhythmic exactitude, so it binds the future, but not because it signifies.5 The same goes for the poetic, which is defined by the fact of operating on a restricted corpus of the signifier, and by aiming to resolve it completely. And it is precisely because the poetic (or the primitive ritual of language) aims not at the production of signifieds, but at the exact consumption and cyclical resolution of a signifying material, that it takes on a limited corpus. Limitation is neither restrictive nor penurious in this context: it is the funda- mental rule of the symbolic. Conversely, the inexhaustible character of our discourse is bound to the rule of equivalence and linearity, just as the infinite character of our material production is inseparable from the change to equivalence in exchange-value (it is this linear infinity which simultane- ously breeds, at every moment of capital, the fact of poverty and the phantasm of a final wealth). The signifier, doubling up and returning to cancel itself out, follows the same movement as the gift and the counter-gift, giving and returning; it is a reciprocity where the use-value and the exchange-value of an object can- cel each other out, and the same complete cycle results in the nothingness of value, on which the intensity of the social relation or the enjoyment of the poem acts. This is a question of revolution. What the poetic accomplishes with the phoneme-value at a microscopic level, every social revolution accom- plishes over the entire flanks of the code of value – use-value, exchange-value, rules of equivalence, axioms, value-systems, coded discourses, rational finalities, etc. – when the death drive is linked to it in order to volatilise them. This same process of completion does not stop short of the analytic operation: in contrast to science as a process of accumulation, the real analytic operation eliminates its object, which comes to an end in it. The term of the analysis – not its ‘constructive’ finality, but its real end – is this volatilisation of the object and its own concepts; or again, these are the processes of the subject who, far from attempting to master its object, accepts being analysed by it in turn, in which movement the respective positions of each are irremediably dismantled. It is only from this point that the subject and the object are exchanged, whereas in their respective positivity (in science for example) they merely draw themselves erect and face each other off for an indefinite period. Science is bound to the con- struction of its object and to its repetition as a phantasm (as much as to the phantasmatic reproduction of the subject of knowledge). A perverse pleasure is attached to this phantasm, the pleasure of continually recon- structing a faltering object, whereas it is proper to analysis, and to enjoyment, to bring its object to an end.6 The poetic is the restitution of symbolic exchange in the very heart of words. Where words, in the discourse of signification, finalised by meaning, do not respond to each other, do not speak to each other (and neither, within words themselves, do consonants, vowels and syllables), in the 225 The Extermination of the Name of God poetic, on the contrary, once the authority of meaning has been broken, all the constitutive elements enter into exchange with, and start to respond to, each other. They are not ‘liberated’, nor is any deep or ‘unconscious’ content ‘set free’ through them: they are simply returned to exchange, and this very process is enjoyment. It is futile to look for the secret in an energetics, a libidinal economy or a fluid dynamics: enjoyment is not bound up with the effectuation of a force, but with the actualisation of an exchange – an exchange without traces, where no force casts a shadow, since every force, and the law behind it, has been resolved. For it is the operation of the sym- bolic to be its own definitive end. The mere possibility of this is a revolution in relation to an order where nothing and no-one, neither words, men, their bodies nor their gazes, are given access to direct communication, but instead pass in transit as values through the models that engender or reproduce them in total ‘estrange- ment’ to each other … The revolution is everywhere where an exchange crops up – be it the infinitesimal exchange of phonemes or syllables in a poetic text, or of millions of men speaking to each other in an insurgent city – that shatters the finality of the models, the mediation of the code and the consecutive cycle of value. For the secret of a social parole, of a revolution, is also the anagrammatic dispersal of the instance of power, the rigorous volatilisation of every transcendent social instance. The fragmented body of power is then exchanged as social parole in the poetry of rebellion. Nothing remains of this parole, nor is any of it accumulated anywhere. Power is reborn from what is not consumed in it, for power is the residue of parole. In social rebellion the same anagrammatical dispersal is at work as that of the body in eroticism, as that of knowledge and its object in the analytic operation: the revolution is symbolic or it is not a revolution at all. The End of the Anathema The whole science of linguistics can be analysed as resistance to the opera- tion of dissemination and literal resolution. Everywhere there is the same attempt to reduce the poetic to a meaning, a ‘wanting-to-say’ [vouloir-dire], to bring it back under the shadow of a meaning, to shatter the utopia of language and to bring it back to the topic of discourse. Linguistics opposes the discursive order (equivalence and accumulation) to the literal order (reversibility and dissemination). We can see this counter-offensive unfolding in the interpretations of the poetic given here and there (Jakobson, Fonagy, Umberto Eco – see ‘The Linguistic Imaginary’, below). Psychoanalytic interpretation, to which we will return, also arises from this resistance. For the radicality of the symbolic is such that all the sciences or disciplines that labour to neutralise it come to be analysed by it in their turn, and returned to their ignorance [méconnaissance]. These, then, are the principles of linguistics and psychoanalysis that will be at stake as regards Saussure’s anagrammatic hypothesis. Although he made this hypothesis in connection with a precise point and subject to Symbolic Exchange and Death226 assessment, there is nothing to prevent us developing it and drawing out its ultimate consequences. In any case, the radicalisation of hypotheses is the only possible method – theoretical violence being the equivalent, in the analytic order, of the ‘poetic violence which replaces the order of all the atoms of a phrase’ of which Nietzsche speaks. We will begin with Starobinski’s commentary on Saussure [Les mots, pp. 33ff.]. Two aspects of his commentary are especially in question here: the theme-word (whether or not it exists); and the specificity of the poetic (and thus Saussure’s discovery). Saussure’s whole argument seems to draw its support from the real exis- tence of the key-word, the latent signifier, the ‘matrix’ and the ‘corpus princeps’: This versification seems to be dominated by a phonemic preoccupation, sometimes internal and free (the mutual correspondence of elements by couplets or rhymes), sometimes external, that is to say, drawing inspiration for phonemic composition from a name like Scipio, Jovei, etc. And we know that after having had this intuition, all his efforts were brought to bear on establishing its proof. Here, it is true, Saussure falls into the trap of scientific validation, into the superstition of the fact. Fortunately, he fails to establish this proof (of knowing whether the practices of the ancient poets were governed scientifically by the anagram of the theme- word), and this failure preserves the scope of his hypothesis, which would in fact, once delimited by a proof, be restricted to a certain type of ancient poetry and, more seriously, it would have restrained the poetic act to the formal gymnastics of the cryptogram, a game of hide-and-seek with the key-word, playing for the reconstitution of a term that had been voluntarily buried and dislocated. This is how Starobinski interprets it: Poetic discourse will therefore only ever be the second manner of being of a name: an elaborate variation that would allow the perspicacious reader to see the obvious but dispersed presence of the principal phonemes … The hypo- gram slides from a simple name into the complex spread of the syllables in a line; it will be a question of recognising and reassembling of the principal syllables, as Isis reunites the dismembered body of Osiris. From the outset, Starobinski eliminates both the emanationist or mystical theory (the germinal diffusion of the theme-word through the line) and the productive theory (the theme-word used by the poet as a framework for the labour of composition). The theme-word is neither an original cell, nor a model: Saussure never tries to establish a relation of semantic priv- ilege between the two levels (nominal and anagrammatised) of the word. Mannequin, sketch, miniature scene, theme or anathema: what status can we give it? This is important, since the whole schema of signification, of ‘making a sign’, is at stake: it is certain at least that we cannot turn the theme-word into the signified of the poem as signifier; and no less certain that there exists, if not a reference, then at least a coherence between the two. Starobinski seems to be sticking as close as possible to Saussure when he proposes: 227 The Extermination of the Name of God The latent theme-word differs only from the manifest line by its compression. It is a word like the many words deployed in the line: they differ only there- fore in the way that the one differs from the multiple. Developed before the total text, hidden behind the text, or rather in it, the theme-word shows no qualitative difference: it is neither of a superior essence, nor of a more humble nature. It offers its substance to an inventive interpretation, causing it to sur- vive in an extended echo. But, if it is a word like other words, why is it necessary that it is hidden or latent? On the other hand, the ‘manifest’ text is something other than the ‘development, multiplication, prolongation’ and ‘echo’ of the theme-word (in itself, the echo is not poetic): this something else is dissemination, dis- memberment and deconstruction. Starobinski overlooks this aspect of the operation until his most nuanced interpretation: The diction of the theme-word seemed to be dislocated, subjected to a rhythm other than that of the vocables through which the manifest discourse unfolds; the theme-word becomes looser, in the manner in which the subject of a fugue is stated, when it is treated as imitation by augmentation. There can be no question of recognising it, the theme-word never having been the object of an exposition; it must be divined in a reading attentive to the possi- ble links between disparate phonemes. This reading is developed according to another tempo (and in another tense): ultimately, we leave the time of the ‘continuity’ proper to customary language. This interpretation, more subtle in that it is allied to the analytic process (floating attention to a free discourse), also seems however to fall into the trap of presupposing a generative formula, whose scattered presence in the poem would in some sense be merely a secondary state, whose identity it would nevertheless always be possible (it is even the neces- sary condition of reading) to locate. Simultaneous double presence at two levels: Osiris dismembered is the same in another form, his finality is to become Osiris again following the phase of dispersion. The identity remains latent, and the process of reading is a process of identification. This is the trap, this is the linguistic defence: as complex as they are, these interpretations only ever turn the poetic into a supplementary oper- ation, a detour in a process of recognition (of a word, a term, a subject). It is always the same that is given to read. But then why this laborious reduction; and what makes all this ‘poetic’? If it is in order to repeat the same term, if the line is only the phonemic dissimulation of the key-word, then all this is futile complication and subtlety. And enjoyment remains unexplained. Poetic intensity never consists in the repetition of an iden- tity, but in the destruction of an identity. It is ignorance [méconnaissance] of this that produces the linguistic reduction, this is where it subtly dis- torts the poetic in the direction of its own axioms: identity, equivalence, refraction of the same, ‘imitation by augmentation’, etc. It especially never recognises the mad distortion, the perdition of the signifier and death in the anagram, as the symbolic form of language, remaining within the lin- guistic game, where poetry is only a code, a ‘key’, in the way we speak of a key to dreams. Symbolic Exchange and Death228 This is what societies’ games do, and this is all they do. This is what bad poetry, allegory and figurative music do, when they refer in too facile a fash- ion to what they ‘signify’, or endlessly metaphorise into other terms. These are charades, riddles and spoonerisms, in which, with the discovery of the key-word, everything is complete. And of course there is pleasure in this detour, as there is removing the mask from what is hidden, and whose secret presence attracts you. But this pleasure has nothing to do with poetic enjoy- ment, which is radical in another way, and not perverse: nothing is discovered in it, nothing expressed in it, and nothing shows through it. No riddles or ‘divinations’, no secret terms, no abutment of meaning. The poetic destroys every cleared path towards a final term, every key, it resolves the anathema, the law weighing down upon language. We could offer the hypothesis that enjoyment is a direct function of the resolution of every positive reference. It is at its minimum where the signified is immediately produced as value: in ‘normal’ communicative discourse – linear and steady speech, exhausted in decoding. Beyond this discourse – the zero degree of enjoyment – all sorts of combinations are possible where a game of hide-and-seek is set up with the signified, a deciphering, and no longer a pure and simple decoding. This latter is the traditional anagram or the text with keys, the ‘Yamamoto Kakpoté’ or the texts from the Fliegende Blätter (interpreted by Freud and analysed by Lyotard in ‘The Dreamwork Does Not Think’, Oxford Literary Review, 6 (1) 1983), where, behind a coherent or incoherent manifest text, there lies a latent text to be found. In both cases, there is a disengagement, a distantiation of the signified, of the last word of history, a detour by way of the signifier, différance as Derrida says. But in any case, it is possible, by whatever developments, to seize hold of the last word, the formula that controls the text. This formula may be subconscious (in the joke, the mot d’esprit, to which we shall return) or unconscious (in the dream), but it is always coherent and discursive. With the dawning of this formula, the cycle of meaning is exhausted. And enjoyment, in every case, is proportionate to the detour, the delay, the loss of the statement, to the time lost in rediscovering it. It is therefore extremely restrained in society’s games, more intense in the mot d’esprit, where the decoding is suspended and where we laugh in proportion to the destruction of meaning. In the poetic text, it is infinite, because no code whatsoever can be found there, no deciphering is possible, and because there is never a signified to put an end to the cycle. Here, the formula is not even unconscious (this is the limit of all psychoana- lytic interpretations), it does not exist. The key is definitively lost. This is the difference between simple cryptogrammatic pleasure (the entire category of the brainwave, where the operation always ends up with a positive residue) and the symbolic radiation of the poem. In other words, if the poem refers to something, it is always to NOTHING, to the term of nothingness, to the signified zero. Poetic intensity consists in the vertigo of this perfect resolution, which leaves the place of the signified or the referent perfectly empty.7 ‘Aboli bibelot d’inanité sonore’: a perfect line where the anagrammatic form is taken up again. ‘ABOLI’ is the generative theme-word running 229 The Extermination of the Name of God throughout the line, and referring to nothing. The anagrammatic form and its content seal an extraordinary union here. Several other things can be advanced concerning the theme-word, even within the limits of Saussure’s hypothesis. The hypogram, being a god’s or a hero’s name, is not just any ‘signified’, and not even a signified at all. We know that the literal invocation of God is dangerous because of the forces it unleashes. For this reason, the anagram is necessary to veil the incantation by rigorously, but obliquely, spelling out the name of God. This allusive mode differs radically from the mode of signification, for the signifier stands for the absence, dispersal and putting to death of the signified. The name of God appeared in the eclipse of its own destruction, in the sacrificial mode, exterminated in the literal sense of the term. From this point, it is clear that the make or break question Saussure puts to himself, and on which Starobinski’s objection entirely rests, concerning the positive existence of the theme-word, is beside the point, since the name of God exists only in order to be annihilated. We endlessly create the identity of the name of God, with which no kind of enjoyment is associated, since enjoyment proceeds from the death of God and his name, and more generally from the fact that where something used to be – a name, a signifier, an agency – nothing remains. In this there is an agonising overhaul of our anthropological conceptions. It is said that poetry was always the exaltation, the positive celebration of a god or a hero (or a great many other things since), but we must see, on the contrary, that it is only beautiful and intense because it returns the god to death, because poetry is the site of its volatilisation and his sacrifice, because in it all the ‘cruelty’ (in Artaud’s sense) and ambivalence of the relation to the gods is played out in a precise manner. You must be as naïve as a Westerner to think that the ‘savages’ prostrated themselves before their gods as we do before ours. On the contrary, in their rites they have always been able to actualise their ambivalence towards the gods, perhaps they only ever roused them in order to put them to death. This is still alive in the poetic. In the poetic, God is not invoked in any other form, the poem does not keep trotting out His name ‘in extension’ (once again, what interest would there be in this? A prayer wheel is quite enough to repeat his name), he is resolved, dismem- bered and sacrificed in His name. We could say, following Bataille, that the discontinuity (discursivity) of the name is abolished in the radical continu- ity of the poem. The ecstasy of death. In the poem, God is not even the hidden subject of the utterance, nor is the poet the subject of enunciation. Language itself adopts speech so as to disappear in it. And the name of God is equally the name of the Father: the law (of repression, of the signifier, of castration) that it brings to bear on the subject and, at the same time, language is exterminated in the anagram. The poetic text is the example, realised at last, of reabsorption without residue, without trace, without the merest atom of a signifier (the name of God) and, through this, of the agency of language itself and, through this reabsorption, the resolution of the law. Symbolic Exchange and Death230 The poem is the fatal declension of the name of God. For us, who no longer have a god, but for whom language has become God (the full and phallic value of the name of God is diffused for us throughout the extent of discourse), the poetic is the site of our ambivalence as regards language, of our death drive as regards language, of the force proper to the extermi- nation of the code. The Nine Billion Names of God In a science-fiction story (Arthur C. Clarke, ‘The nine billion names of God’ [in Of Time and Stars, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1981, pp. 15–32]), a broth- erhood of lamas, lost in the foothills of Tibet, devote their whole lives to the recitation of the names of God. There are a great many of these names – nine billion. When they have all been stated and declined, the world will come to an end, an entire cycle of the world. Bringing the world to an end, step by step, word by word, by exhausting the total corpus of the signifiers of God: this is their religious delirium – or the truth of their death drive. But the lamas read slowly, their difficult task lasting many centuries. They then hear talk of mysterious Western machines that can record and decode at an incredible speed. One of them sets about ordering a powerful computer from IBM to hasten their task. The American technicians arrive in the Tibetan mountains to set up and programme the machine. According to them it will take only three months to get to the last of the nine billion names.8 They themselves do not believe a word of the prophesied conse- quences of this enumeration, and, shortly before the expiry of the operation, afraid that the monks might turn against them when faced with the failure of their prophecy, they flee the monastery. Then, climbing down into the civilised world, they see the stars go out one by one … The poem, too, is the total resolution of the world, as soon as the scat- tered phonemes of the name of God are consumed in it. When the anagram has been completely declined, nothing remains, the world has turned once again, and the intense enjoyment running through it has nowhere else to come from. The second point on which Starobinski’s commentary bears is the spec- ificity of the poetic. Basically, he says, the rules Saussure evokes and imputes to a deliberate and calculated act may be reduced to the basic givens of all language. On the first rule (of the coupling): The total phonemic opportunities language offers at every instant to whoever wants to make use of them … are sufficiently numerous not to demand a laborious combination, requiring instead an attentive combination. Ultimately no more chance: pure probability is sufficient. Again: The facts of phonemic symmetry [the term ‘symmetry’ is already a reductive term, that sees a specular redundancy in the doubling of phonemes – J.B.] noted here are striking: but are they the effect of an observed rule (of which no testi- mony has survived)? Could we not invoke, to justify the multiplicity of internal correspondences, an only barely conscious and half instinctive taste for the echo? 231 The Extermination of the Name of God ‘An instinctive taste for the echo’: the poet would be basically nothing other than a linguistic particle accelerator who merely increases the rate of the redundancy of customary language. That’s what ‘inspiration’ is, and there is no need to calculate for it: a little ‘attention’ and ‘instinct’ is all we need: Must the Ancients’ poetic practices resemble the obsessional ritual more than the surge of inspired speech? Of course we can acknowledge formal constraints: It is true that traditional scansion subjects the vates’ diction to a regularity that we must indeed qualify as obsessional. Nothing prevents us from imagin- ing, since the facts go along with this, an increasing formal requirement that would oblige the poet to use every phonetic element twice in the same line. But whether the poet is an inspired resonator or a calculating obsessional, it is always the same type of interpretation: the coupling and the anagram are the effects of a resonance, a redundancy, an ‘imitation by augmentation’, etc. – in short, the poetic is a play of combinations, and since all language is combinatory, the poetic becomes once more a particular case of language: Why do we not turn our attention to an aspect of the process of speech in the anagram, a process which is neither fortuitous, nor fully conscious? Why should there not exist an iteration, a generative and involuntary repetition that would double and project the materials of a primary speech within discourse, unpronounced and at the same time non-evanescent? Due to the lack of a conscious rule, the anagram can nevertheless be considered as a regularity (or a law) where the arbitrary theme-word submits to the necessity of a process. The hypothesis of the theme-word, and its rigorous dispersal uncovers the extremely simple truth that language is an unending resource, and that dissimulated behind every phrase is the increasing clamour of the multitude from which it was taken in order to be isolated in front of us in its originality. But what then did Saussure uncover? Nothing. Was this a ‘staggering error’? Worse: a platitude: Generalised in this way, his hypothesis is anni- hilated. This is how, in all linguistic ‘good faith’, the radical difference of the poetic is denied. Saussure was at least seized by the intoxication of the poetic – the intoxication of the rigour with which he saw language turn back on itself, operating on its own material, instead of unfolding in a linear manner, idiotically following on from itself, as in customary dis- course. This is no longer the case with Starobinski: rigour has become an ‘obsession’, a psychopathological category; total dispersion has become a probabilistic occurrence/recurrence; anagrammatic dispersion has become the ‘clamouring multitude of language’, a harmonic contextuality where a particular meaning is specified in turn: Every discourse is a set that facilitates the subtraction of a subset … moreover, every text is itself the subset of another text … every text incorporates and is incorporated. Every text is a productive product. Onwards to the Russian dolls, to the ‘abyssal’ [en abyme] textuality dear to Tel Quel. Symbolic Exchange and Death232 Starobinski’s whole argument amounts to saying either the poet is just an obsessive formalist (if we follow Saussure’s hypothesis), or his operation is exactly the same as that of all language, and so it is Saussure who is the obsessive: everything he believed he had discovered is nothing but the researcher’s retrospective illusion, since: Every complex structure provides the observer with sufficient elements for him to select a subset apparently endowed with meaning, which nothing prevents us according an a priori logical or chronological antecedence. Poor Saussure, who saw the anagram everywhere, and attributed his phan- toms to the poets! Starobinski and the linguists do not dream: by verifying Saussure’s hypothesis ad infinitum, they reduce it to zero. To do this it was enough to stick to its content (the inference of the theme-word, its positive role, its metamorphoses) instead of judging it on its form. The stakes of the poetic are not the production of, nor even the combinatory variations on, a theme, nor an identifiable ‘subset’. In this case, in fact, it is clearly part of a univer- sal mode of discourse (except we cannot then see the necessity of the poetic, its different status, nor the enjoyment proper to this mode as opposed to that of discourse). Its stake is, precisely through the labour of the anagram, the point of no return in whatever term or theme. At this point, whether the theme-word’s existence is recognised or not is a false problem. This is not because, according to Starobinski, every language is, at bottom, articulated on a sort of code or formula – but because, in any case, it is the annihilation of this code that is the form of the poetic. As Saussure describes it, this form holds for all poetry, the most modern and the most ancient. The principle of the annihilation of the code retains all its intelligibility even if the exis- tence of this formula cannot be verified.9 The only thing is that this code, which in ancient poetry could have taken the form of a word-theme, might, in modern poetry, be no more than signifying constellation that can no longer be located as such, even a letter or a formula of the Leclairian type, lost forever, or unconscious, or even the ‘differential signifier’ that Tel Quel talks about. What is essential, whatever the formula is, is to consider the poetic not as the mode of the formula’s appearance, but as its mode of dis- appearance. In this sense, so much the better that Saussure failed to find proof of the formula: by verifying the content, he would have taken away the radicality of the form. Saussure’s failure and intoxication, since they at least maintain the urgency of the poetic, are better than all the banalities that accept the poetic as a fact of universal language. The Linguistic Imaginary We must now leave Saussure and look at how the linguists dealt with the poetic and the questions it brought to bear on their ‘science’. All things considered, the defence they put up in the face of this danger is the same as that mounted by the adherents of political economy (and its Marxist critics) 233 The Extermination of the Name of God in the face of the symbolic alternative in previous societies and in our own. All of them chose to differentiate and modulate their categories while not changing their principle of rationality in any way, that is, without changing the arbitrariness and the imaginary that made them hypostatise the order of discourse and the order of production as universals. As scientists, they have good reason to believe in this order, since they are agents of order. Thus the linguists concede that the arbitrary character of the sign is a bit shaken by the poetic; but certainly not the signifier/signified distinction, nor therefore the law of equivalence and the function of representation. Indeed, in a certain way, the signifier in this instance represents the signified far better, since it ‘expresses’ it directly following a necessary correlation between each element of the substance of the signifier and what it is sup- posed to express, instead of referring to it arbitrarily, as in discourse. The signifier’s autonomy is conceded: The conceptual messages transmitted through the intermediary of sound necessarily differ from the pre-conceptual contents in the sound sequences and rhythms themselves. They either happen to converge or diverge. (I. Fonagy, Diogène, 51) However, this is basically so that the signifier better embodies, not merely by convention, but in its materiality and its flesh, what it has to say: ‘In Swinburne’s lines, we feel the breeze passing …’. Instead of it being, as in conceptual language, the unit of primary articulation, the phoneme, the unit of secondary articulation, becomes representative, while, however, the form of the representation has not itself changed. It is always a question of referring, no longer to the concept by means of the terms of the langue nor syntax, but by means of vowels and syllables, the atoms of language, and their com- bination in rhythm, to an elementary presence, to an original instance of things (the ‘breeze’ as primary process!). Between the substance of language and the substance of the world (wind, water, feelings, passions, the uncon- scious; everything ‘pre-conceptual’, which is in fact already conceptualised, without appearing to be, by a whole code of perception), there is always a positive correlation at play, a play of equivalence amongst values. In this way, muted vowels would stand for the dark and obscure, etc., and there would no longer be an arbitrary conceptual equivalence in this case, but a necessary phonemic equivalence. Thus Rimbaud’s vowel-sonnet, and Fonagy’s entire exposition of the ‘symbolism’ of linguistic sounds (Diogène, 51, p. 78): everyone would agree to recognise that ‘i’ is lighter, faster and thinner than ‘u’; that ‘k’ and ‘r’ are harder than ‘l’, etc. The feeling of thinness associated with the vowel ‘i’ may be the result of a sub- conscious kinaesthetic perception of the position of the tongue in the emission of this sound. The ‘r’ appears masculine [!] by reason of the greater muscular effort required to emit it in comparison with the alveolar ‘l’ or the labial ‘m’. A real metaphysics of an original langue, a desperate attempt to rediscover a natural deposit of the poetic, an expressive genius of language, that would only have to be captured and transcribed. Symbolic Exchange and Death234 In fact, all this is coded, and it is just as arbitrary to correlate the repeti- tion of the phoneme ‘f’ with the passing breeze as it is to correlate the word ‘table’ with the concept of table. There is nothing more in common between them than there is between a piece of music and what it ‘evokes’ (landscape or passion), other than cultural convention, or a code. That this code claims to be anthropological (‘naturally’ soft vowels) takes nothing away from its arbitrary character. Conversely moreover, we can clearly maintain, with Benveniste, that the very strong cultural convention that binds the word ‘table’ to the concept of ‘table’ imposes genuine necessity, and that at bottom the sign is never arbitrary. This is correct: the fundamen- tal arbitrariness lies not in the internal organisation of the sign, but in the imposition of the sign as value, that is to say, in the presupposition of two instances and their equivalence in accordance with the law: the sign acting as a stand-in, as emanating from a reality that makes signs to you. Such is linguistics’ metaphysics, and such is its imaginary. Its interpretation of the poetic is still haunted by this presupposition. By contrast, when Harpo Marx waves a real sturgeon instead of pro- nouncing the password ‘sturgeon’, then indeed, by substituting the referent of the term and by abolishing their separation, he really explodes the arbitrariness at the same time as the system of representation, in a poetic act par excellence: putting the signifier ‘sturgeon’ to death by its own referent. Whether conceptual or pre-conceptual, it is always the ‘message’ and the ‘aim of the message as such’, by which Jakobson defines the poetic func- tion, which by autonomising the operation of the signifying material merely refers it to a supplementary effect of signification. Something other than the concept comes through, but it is still some thing; another value is realised through the very play of the signifier, but it remains a value; the signifying material functions at another level, its own, but it continues to function: moreover, Jakobson makes the poetic function supplementary rather than alternative, just one linguistic function out of many – a surplus-value of signification due to which the signifier itself is taken into account as an autonomous value. The poetic gives you more! The ‘self-presence’ [présence à lui-mème] of the signifier is analysed in terms of redundancy, as an internal echo, as resonance, phonetic recurrence, etc. (Hopkins: ‘The verse is a discourse that repeats, either wholly or par- tially, the same phonemic figure’). Or again: It is acknowledged that poets worthy of the name possess a delicate and penetrating sensibility as regards the impressive value of the words and sounds with which they compose; to communicate this value to their read- ers, they are often moved to represent, around the principal word, the phonemes that characterise it, in such a way that, in short, this word becomes the generator of the entire line in which it appears. (M. Grammont, Traité de phonétique [Paris: Delagrave], 1933) In all this, the ‘labour’ of the signifier always appears as a positive assem- blage, concurrent with that of the signified, which sometimes coincide, and 235 The Extermination of the Name of God sometimes diverge, to cite Fonagy again, but in any case the outcome is merely ‘a subjacent current of signification’ – no question of escaping the being of discourse. And it could not be otherwise from a perspective that conceives the poetic as the autonomisation of one of the functional catego- ries of the order of discourse. The other Jakobsonian formula maintains this illusion: the poetic func- tion projects the principle of equivalence from the axis of selection to the axis of combination. Equivalence is promoted to the rank of the constitu- tive process of the sequence. In poetry, one syllable is equalized with any other syllable of the same sequence; word stress is assumed to equal word stress, as unstress equals unstress, long is matched with long, short is matched with short … [Jakobson, ‘Linguistics and Poetics’ in Language in Literature, ed. K. Pomorska and S. Rudy, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard, 1987, p. 71] Of course, articulation is no longer that of customary syntax, it is always rather a question of a constructive architecture; that anything other than a scansion of equivalence could start to play a role in prosody is never envis- aged. Jakobson is content to substitute the ambiguity of the signified for the ambivalence of the signifier. Ambiguity is what characterises the poetic and distinguishes it from the discursive: ‘Ambiguity is an intrinsic, inalienable character of any self-focussed message briefly, a corollary feature of poetry’ (Jakobson, ‘Linguistics and Poetics’, p. 85). ‘The machinations of ambiguity are among the very roots of poetry’ (Empson, Seven Types of Ambiguity [London: Chatto & Windus, 1963]). Jakobson again: The supremacy of the poetic function over the referential function does not obliterate the reference but makes it ambiguous. The double-sensed message finds correspondence in a split addresser, a split addressee, as well as in a split reference. [‘Linguistics and Poetics’, p. 85] In this way, all the categories of discursive communication ‘work loose’ in the poetic (all, curiously, except the code, of which Jakobson does not speak: what does the code become? Does it too become ambiguous? But it would then be the end of langue and linguistics). Ambiguity is not danger- ous in itself. It does not change the principles of identity and equivalence in the slightest, nor does it change the principle of meaning as value; it merely produces floating values, renders identities diffuse, and makes the rules of the referential game more complex, without abolishing anything. Thus, for Jakobson, the ambiguous sender and addressee merely signifies the uncoupling of the I/YOU relation, internal to the message, from the author/reader relation: the positions of the respective subjects have not been lost, in some sense they expand indefinitely – subjects become unset- tled in their subject-positions. Thus the message becomes unsettled, ambig- uous, in its definition; all categories (sender, addressee, message, referent) move, work loose in their respective positions, but the structural grid of discourse remains the same. Symbolic Exchange and Death236 ‘The machinations of ambiguity’ do not therefore make a great deal of difference to the form of discourse. Jakobson has this bold formula: Poetry does not consist in adding rhetorical ornament to discourse: it involves a total revaluation of discourse and all its components, whatever they may be. Bold and ambiguous, since the components (sender/addressee, message/ code, etc.) maintain their separate existences, they are simply ‘revalued’. The general economy remains the same – the political economy of discourse. At no point does this thought advance to the point of the abolition of separate functions: the abolition of the subject of communication (and therefore the sender/addressee distinction); the abolition of the message as such (and therefore of all the code’s structural autonomy). All this work, in which the radical character of the poetic act consists, is swamped by ‘ambiguity’ and by a certain hesitation as regards linguistic categories. A ‘discourse within a discourse’, a ‘message centred on itself’: all this merely defines a rhetoric of ambiguity. But the ambiguous discourse, squinting at itself (a strabismus of signs), remains the discourse of positivity, the discourse of the sign as value. In the poetic, by contrast, language turns back on itself to be abolished. It is not ‘centred’ on itself, it decentres itself. It undoes the entire process of the constructive logic of the sign, resolving all the internal specularity that makes a sign a sign: something full, reflected, centred on itself, and, as such, effectively ambiguous. The poetic is the loss of the spectacular closure of the sign and the message. At bottom, this is the same metaphysics that has governed the theory of artistic form since romanticism: the bourgeois metaphysics of totality. Art should properly evoke ‘this quality of being a whole and of belonging to the larger, all-inclusive, whole which is the universe in which we live’ (John Dewey, Art as Experience, pp. 194–5; quoted in Umberto Eco, The Open Work [tr. Anna Cancogni, London: Hutchinson Radius, 1989], p. 26). Eco appropriates this cosmology for himself, and retranscribes it in linguistic terms. The totalisation of meaning takes place by means of a ‘chain reaction’ and the infinite subdivision of signifieds: All this is attained by means of an identification between signifier and signi- fied … the aesthetic sign … is not confined to a given denotatum, but rather expands every time the structure within which it is inevitably embodied, is duly appreciated – a sign whose signified, resounding relentlessly against its signifier, keeps acquiring new echoes, (ibid., p. 36) This, then, is a schema of a first (denotative) phase of reference, followed by a second phase of ‘harmonic’ reference, where a ‘theoretically unlimited’ chain reaction is operative – hence the evocation of the cosmic. This theory serves as the basic ideology of everything we have been able to say about the poetic (nor does psychoanalysis escape this) – ambiguity, polysemia, polyvalence, polyphony of meaning: it is always a matter of the radiation of the signified, of a simultaneity of significations. The linear character of discourse hides an harmonious concert of different messages. (Fonagy, Diogène, 51, p. 104) 237 The Extermination of the Name of God The semantic density of language, the wealth of information, etc.: the poet ‘liberates’ all sorts of virtualities (with, as a corollary, a differential herme- neutics of the role played by the reader: every interpretation ‘enriches’ the text with that reader’s personal harmonies). This whole myth plays on a ‘savage’ pre-conceptual anteriority and a ‘virginity’ of meaning: The poet rejects the usual and appropriate term for the concept, which is a skeletal reduction of all previous experiences, when he finds himself in front of an untamed, virginal, reality … The word must be recreated each time from an intense personal experience; the skeleton of the thing in itself must be attired in living flesh so as to give it the concrete reality the thing has for me. (ibid., p. 97) We are no longer sure whether to undress the concept or dress it up in order to rediscover the virginity of the poetic! In any case, it is a question of uncovering ‘the secret correspondences that might exist between things’. This romantic theory, with its conception of ‘genius’, paradoxically turns out to be rewritten today in terms of information theory. This polyphonic ‘wealth’ can be put in terms of ‘additional information’. At the level of the signified: Petrarch’s poetry constitutes a ‘large capital of information’ on love (Eco, The Open Work, p. 54). At the level of the signifier a certain type of disorder, rupture and negation of the customary and predictable linguis- tic order increases the rate of information of the message. There would be a ‘dialectical tension’ between the elements of order and disorder that can serve as a base-rate within the poetic. Whereas the most probable use of the linguistic system would yield nothing, the unexpectedness of the poetic, its relative improbability, determines a minimum rate of information. Here again, the poetic gives you more. Thus the semiological imaginary easily reconciles romantic polyphony and quantitative description: The structure of poetry can most rigorously be described and interpreted in terms of a chain of possibilities. … A superior accumulation at mid-range frequencies of a certain class of phonemes, or the contrasting assemblage of two opposed classes in the phonemic texture of a line, a strophe, or a poem, plays the role of a ‘subjacent current of signification’. (Fonagy, Diogène, 51) ‘In language, form has a manifestly granular structure, which is open to a quantitative description’ (Jakobson). With this we can confront Kristeva: Words are not non-decomposable entities held together by their meaning, but assemblages of signifying, phonemic and scriptural atoms leaping from word to word, thus creating unsuspected and unconscious relations between the elements of the discourse: this putting into relation of signifying elements constitutes a signifying infrastructure of the langue. (Julia Kristeva, ‘Poésie et négativité’, in Séméiotikè [Paris: Seuil, 1969], p. 185) All these formulas converge on the idea of a ‘Brownian’ stage of language, an emulsional stage of the signifier, homologous to the molecular stage of physical matter, that liberates ‘harmonies’ of meaning just as fission or fusion liberate new molecular affinities. The whole conceived as an ‘infrastructure’, a ‘subjacent current’, that is to say, as a logically prior, or Symbolic Exchange and Death238 structurally more elementary, stage of discourse, just like matter. This is a scientistic, ‘materialist’ view of discourse, where the atom and the mole- cule are properly assimilated to the secondary articulation of language, as the molecular stage – an original stage, prior to the differentiating organisa- tion of meaning – is to the poetic, Besides, Kristeva is not afraid of her own metaphor: she says that modern science has broken the body down into simple elements in the same way as (poetic) linguistics has disarticulated signification into signifying atoms. There, concurrently with the metaphysics of primary articulation (the metaphysics of signifieds, bound to the play of signifying units), what we might call the metaphysics of secondary articulation takes shape, in which the effect of infrastructural signification is bound up with the play of distinct units, the minimal entities of discourse, where they are once again taken as positive valencies (just as atoms and molecules have an elementary valency), as phonemic materiality whose assemblage takes place in terms of linkages and probabilities. But the poetic is no more based on the autonomous articulation of the phonemic levy than on that of words or syntax. It does not play secondary articulation off against the primary.10 It is the abolition of the analytic dis- tinction of the articulations on which language’s capacity for discourse and its operational autonomy rests, as the means of expression (and as the object of linguistics). In any case, why should the phonemic level be more ‘materialist’ than that of the lexical concept or the sentence? As soon as we turn the phonemic into minimal substances, the phoneme, like the atom, becomes an idealist reference. With the physics of the atom, science relentlessly entrenches its positivist rationality. It has not brought the pho- nemic any closer to another mode, which would presuppose the respective extermination of the object and subject of science. Perhaps today it is reaching its borders, at the same time as materialism is in total theoretical crisis, without meanwhile being able to step beyond its shadow: there is no ‘dialectical’ transition between science, even at the apogee of its crisis, and something perhaps beyond it and irremediably separated from it, since science is founded on the basis of the denegation (not dialectical negation, but denegation) of dialectics. The most rigorous materialism will never lead beyond the principle of the rationality of value. Tel Quel have taken the deconstruction of the sign furthest, up to the total ‘liberation’ of the signifier. End of the mortgage of the signified and the message, there is no ‘polysemia’, it is the signifier that is plural. No more ‘ambiguity’ of the message, just the intertextuality of the signifier, which is linked with and is produced by its pure ‘material’ logic. The endless text of the paragram, significance is the real level of the productivity of language, a productivity beyond value, opposed to the signification of the sign-product. Julia Kristeva, in ‘Poésie et négativité’ (pp. 185ff.) comes closest to acknowledging a poetic form, even if the superstition of a ‘materialist pro- duction’ of meaning leads her nevertheless, by returning the poetic to the semiotic order, to censoriously describe it as a radical alternative. 239 The Extermination of the Name of God She posits the ambivalence of the poetic signified (and not its mere ambiguity): it is concrete and general at the same time, it includes both (logical) affirmation and negation, it announces the simultaneity of the possible and the impossible; far from postulating the ‘concrete versus the general’, it explodes this conceptual break: bivalent logic (0/1) is abolished by ambivalent logic. Hence the very particular negativity of the poetic. The bivalent logic of discourse rests on the negation internal to the judgement, it founds the concept and its self-equivalence (the signified is what it is). The negativity of the poetic is a radical negativity bearing on the logic of judgement itself. Something ‘is’ and is not what it is: a utopia (in the literal sense) of the signified. The thing’s self-equivalence (and, of course, the subject’s) is volatilised. Thus the poetic signified is the space where ‘Non- Being intertwines with Being in a thoroughly disconcerting manner’. But there is a danger (which can be seen in outline in Kristeva’s work) of taking this ‘space’ as a topic again, and taking the ‘intertwining’ as, once again, the dialectic. There is a danger of filling this space up with every figure of sub- stitution: ‘Metaphor, metonymy, and all the tropes are inscribed in space surrounded by this double semantic structure.’ The danger of the meta- phor, of an economy of metaphor that remains positive. In Kristeva’s chosen example, Baudelaire’s meubles voluptueux (‘voluptuous furniture’), the poetic effect does not stem from an added erotic value, a play of addi- tional phantasms nor from a metaphorical or metonymic ‘value’. It stems from the short-circuit of the two, the furniture being no longer furniture and the voluptuous pleasure no longer being voluptuous pleasure – the furniture (meubles) becomes voluptuous, and the voluptuous pleasure becomes mobile – nothing remains of the two separated fields of value. Neither of the two terms is poetic in itself, no more than their synthesis is: they are poetic in that the one is volatilised in the other. There is no rela- tion between (poetic) enjoyment and the voluptuous pleasure as such. In love, there is only voluptuous pleasure – but it becomes enjoyment when it is volatilised into furniture. And the furniture is cancelled by the volup- tuous pleasure in the same way: the same reversal sweeps away the proper position of each term. It is in this sense that Rimbaud’s formula stands: ‘It is true literally, in every sense.’ Metaphor is simply the transfer of value from one field to the other, to the point of the ‘absorption of a multiplicity of texts (meanings) in the message’ (Kristeva, ‘Poésie et négativité’, p. 194). The poetic implies the reversibility of one field onto the other, and thus the annulment of their respective values. Whereas values are combined, implicated and inter- textualised in the metaphor according to a play of ‘harmonies’ (the ‘secret accord of language’), in poetic enjoyment they are annulled: radical ambivalence is non-valence. Kristeva, then, reduces the radical theory of ambivalence to a theory of intertextuality and the ‘plurality of codes’. The poetic can no longer be distinguished from discourse save by ‘the infinite nature of its code’; it is a plural discourse, the other only being the limit case of a monological Symbolic Exchange and Death240 discourse, a discourse with only one code. There is therefore a place for both types of discourse in a general semiotics: ‘The semiotic practice of speech [discourse] is only one possible semiotic practice’ (ibid., p. 215). Semanalysis has a duty to take them all into account, without exclusion, that is to say, without neglecting the irreducibility of the poetic, but equally without reducing it to the logic of the sign. Semanalysis has a duty to constitute a ‘non-reductive typology of the plurality of semiotic practices’. There is an increasing intricacy of the different logics of meaning: The functioning of speech [la parole] is impregnated with paragrammatism, just as the functioning of poetic language is circumscribed by the laws of speech. (ibid., p. 214) Once again Starobinski’s doubts about Saussure come to the surface: the lat- ter’s tolerance of both the poetic and the discursive in the name of universal rules of language (here in the name of a ‘genuinely materialist’ science called semiotics). In fact, this is a reductive and repressive position. For from the poetic to the discursive there is no difference in their respective articulation of meaning, there is a radical antagonism. Neither of them is an ‘infrastructure of signification’ (would the logical discourse on it be its ‘superstructure’?). Further, discourse, logos, is not a particular case in the infinity of codes: it is the code that puts an end to infinity, it is the discourse of closure that puts an end to the poetic, to the para- and the ana-grammatic. Conversely, it is on the basis of its dismantling, its destruction, that language revives the possibility of ‘infinity’. In fact, ‘infinity of codes’ is a bad term, since it permits the amalgam of the one and the ‘infinite’ in the ‘mathematics’ of the text, and their distri- bution along a single chain. It must be said, in terms of radical incompatabilty and antagonism, that it is on the basis of the destruction of the discourse of value that language revives the possibility of ambivalence: this is the poetic revolution in relation to discourse, where the one can only be the death of the other. The semiotic project is only a more subtle way of neutralising the radi- cality of the poetic and saving the hegemony of linguistics (re-baptised ‘semiotics’), no longer by pure and simple annexation, but under cover of the ideology of ‘plurality’. The subversion of linguistics by the poetic does not stop here: it leads one to wonder whether the rules of language even hold good for the field of language over which they prevail, that is to say, in the dominant sphere of communication (similarly, the failure of political economy to give an account of anterior societies leads one, as an after-effect, to wonder if these principles have any value for us). Now it is true that the immediate practice of language is somewhat resistant to the rational abstraction of linguistics. O. Mannoni puts this well in ‘The ellipsis and the bar’: Linguistics originates from the bar it has installed between the signifier and the signified, and their reunion spells its death – which brings us back to conversation in everyday life. (‘L’ellipse et la barre’, in Clefs pour l’imagi- naire, p. 35) 241 The Extermination of the Name of God The Saussurian bar has facilitated the renewal of linguistic theory from top to bottom. In the same way, Marxism, by means of the concept of a material infrastructure opposed to the ‘superstructure’, has established something like an ‘objective’ and revolutionary analysis of society. Science is based on rupture. In exactly the same way, a ‘science’, a rationalist practice (organi- sation), originates from the distinction between theory and practice. Every science and every rationality lasts as long as this rupture lasts. Dialectics makes endless formal adjustments to this rupture, it never resolves it. To dialecticise the infra- and the superstructure, theory and practice, or even signifier and signified, langue and parole, is merely a vain effort at totalisa- tion. Science lives and dies with the rupture. This is indeed why current non-scientific practice, both linguistic and social, is revolutionary in some way, because it does not make these kinds of distinctions. Just as it has never made a distinction between mind and body, whereas every dominant religion and philosophy survives only on the basis of this distinction, so our, everybody’s, immediate and ‘savage’ social practices do not make a distinction between theory and practice, infra- and superstructure: of itself and without debating the issue, it is transversal, beyond rationality, whether bourgeois or Marxist. Theory, ‘good’ Marxist theory, never analyses real social practice, it analyses the object that it produces for itself through separating this practice into an infra- and a superstructure, or, in other words, it analyses the social field that it produces for itself through the dissociation between theory and practice. Theory will never lead back to ‘practice’ since it only exists through having vivisected it: fortunately this practice is beginning to return to and even overcome it. But this brings with it the end of dialectical and historical materialism. In the same way, the immediate, everyday linguistic practice of speech and the ‘speaking subject’ pays no attention to the distinction between the sign and the world (nor that between signifier and signified, the arbitrary character of the sign, etc.). Benveniste says and acknowledges this, but only as regards memory, since this is precisely the stage that science overcomes it and leaves it far behind: it interests only the linguistic subject, the sub- ject of the langue, which is at the same time the subject of knowledge: Benveniste himself. Somewhere, however, the other is right, speaking in advance [en deçà] of the distinction between sign and world, in total ‘superstition’ – the other (along with ourselves and even Benveniste) knows more, it is true, about the essentials than Benveniste the linguist. For the methodology of the separation of signifier and signified holds no better than the methodology of the separation of the mind and the body. The same imaginary in both cases. In the one case, psychoanalysis 11 came to say what this was, as, in the other, did poetics. But there has basically never been any need for psychoanalysis nor for poetics: no-one has ever believed in them apart from the scholars and linguists themselves (just as, in the final analysis, no-one has ever believed in economic determinism other than economic scientists and their Marxist critics). Symbolic Exchange and Death242 Virtually, and literally, speaking, there has never been a linguistic subject; it is not even true of we who speak that we purely and simply reflect the code of linguistics. Likewise, there has never been an economic subject, a homo oeconomicus – this fiction has never been inscribed anywhere other than in a code – there has never been a subject of consciousness, and there has never been a subject of the unconscious. In the simplest practice, there is always something that cuts across these simulation models, which are all rational models; there has always been a radicality absent from every code, every ‘objective’ rationalisation, that has basically only ever given rise to a single great subject: the subject of knowledge, whose form is shattered from today, from now, by undivided speech.12 Basically we have all known this for much longer than Descartes, Saussure, Marx and Freud. The Witz, or The Phantasm of the Economic in Freud Is there an affinity between the poetic and the psychoanalytic? If it is clear that poetic form (dissemination, reversibility, strict delimitation of the corpus) cannot be reconciled with linguistic form (the signifier–signified equivalence, linearity of the signifier, undefined corpus), it seems, on the contrary, that it intersects with psychoanalytic form (primary processes: displacement, condensation, etc.). In the dream, the lapsus, the symptom, and the joke, or mot d’esprit, everywhere the unconscious works, we can, with Freud, read the distortions of the signifier–signified relation, the lin- earity of the signifier, the discrete sign. This distortion of discourse, excess and transgression of language, where the phantasm operates, marks enjoyment. But what of desire and the unconscious in the poetic; and up to what point does libidinal economy account for it? The poetic and the psychoanalytic do not mix. The symbolic mode is not that of the labour of the unconscious. To question the poetic as Freud does is therefore to question psychoanalysis from the standpoint of the symbolic: the analysis in reverse is always the only one that, by means of this very reversal, allows us to escape theory, which is purely and simply the exercise of power. Freud’s analysis of the joke, the mot d’esprit, can serve as our guiding thread, for otherwise there is no theorised difference in Freud between the properly symptomatic field and that of the work of art and ‘artistic cre- ation’ (the concept of ‘sublimation’, as we know, suffers from a lack of rigour and an hereditary idealism). This is a point of considerable impor- tance: if the poem is neither a lapsus nor a mot d’esprit, there is nothing to account for it in the theory of the unconscious. Contrary to Saussure, who is not concerned with poetic pleasure nor even with any cause or finality whatever of what he describes, Freud’s analysis is functional, it is a theory of enjoyment [jouissance] in which work on the signifier is always related to the fulfilment of a desire. Moreover, this is an economic theory of enjoyment. The Witz, the mot d’esprit or joke 243 The Extermination of the Name of God moves more rapidly, by way of short-cuts and short-circuits, towards what it means to say, and it says things, it ‘liberates’ significations that would never have existed without it, other than at the cost of considerable con- scious intellectual effort. It is this ellipsis of psychical distance that is the source of enjoyment. In other words, the joke lifts the censorship, and the subversion this brings about ‘liberates’ the energies bound to the super ego and the process of repression. The ‘liberation’ of effects: the disinvestment of unconscious or preconscious representations; the disinvestment of the repressing psychical agency. In any case, enjoyment emerges from a resi- due, an excess or a differential quantum of energy made available by the operation of the Witz. In this sense, concision, or the multiple use of the same material in dif- ferent modalities, is a fundamental characteristic of the mot d’esprit. Always economising on effort: a single signifier may signify at multiple levels; we draw a maximum of (sometimes contradictory) significations from a mini- mum of signifiers. It is futile to insist on analogies with the poetic mode: the multiple use of the same material evokes Saussure’s anagram, coupling the necessary delimitation of the corpus and the ‘maximal energy in signs’ of which Nietzsche speaks. Freud too says of the poet that ‘polyphonic orchestration allows him to emit messages on the threefold levels of clear consciousness, the subconscious and the unconscious’. In every instance so much energy is ‘economised’ in relation to the ordinary system of distrib- uting investments. In the polygon of forces that is the psychical apparatus, enjoyment is like the result of a sort of short-cut, or rather of the transver- sality of the Witz, which, cutting a diagonal across the diverse layers of the psychical apparatus catches up with its objective with less expenditure, even effortlessly attaining unforeseen objectives, yielding a kind of energetic surplus value, the enjoyment ‘premium’, the ‘yield of pleasure’. This energetic calculus has something of the whiff of capital about it, the capital of a saving of energy (Freud continually employs this term) where enjoyment never comes about save by the subtraction, by default, of a residue or a surplus from an investment (but never an excess) – or even from nothing at all: from an inverse process of expenditure, the abo- lition of energies and finalities. We are not speaking primarily about ‘labour’, or even the ‘signifier’, because this level is never primary for Freud. His libidinal economy is based on the existence of unconscious contents (affects and representations), of a repression and a production of the repressed, a calculated investment that steers this production towards an equilibrium (the resolution of tension) of bound and unbound energies. Freudian enjoyment takes place and is spoken of in terms of forces and quanta of energy. In the Witz or the dream, the play of signifiers is never in itself the articulation of enjoyment: it only opens roads to phantasmatic or repressed contents. The unconscious is a ‘medium’ which is never a ‘message’ in itself, since something like desire – strictly understood in terms of the topological or the economic theory – is necessary in order that it, the ‘Id’ that speaks, speaks in its own voice. The play of the signifier is Symbolic Exchange and Death244 only ever the tracery of desire. Here, around the unconscious ‘mode of production’ (and its mode of representation), is where the entire problem of libidinal economy and the critique of libidinal economy is posed, in the perspective of an enjoyment that never had anything to do with the economic. In The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Freud says of the slip of the tongue, the lapsus: The reader’s preparedness alters the text and reads into it something which he is expecting or with which he is occupied. The only contribution towards a misreading which the text itself need make is that of affording some resem- blance in the verbal image, which the reader can alter in the sense he requires. (Standard Edition, Vol. 6, 1960, pp. 112–13) It is of course a matter of a latent, repressed content, waiting to leap up and ‘profit’ from the fantasies, the interstices and the weak points of logi- cal discourse in order to cause an explosion. This, at the level of discourse, is what happens to the body in the concept of anaclisis, desire ‘profits’ from the satisfaction of a physiological need in order to invest libidinally in a particular zone of the body, diverting the pure and simple function (organic logic) towards the fulfilment of desire. While this is true, it is not entirely true, since the articulation of the need and the desire has never been clarified. Between the two terms, so thoughtlessly formulated, on the one hand as the determinate completion of a function, and on the other as the indeterminate fulfilment of a desire, the concept of anaclisis is only a bridging concept that articulates nothing at all. Here libidinal economy suffers from the same ‘layering’ of the concept of need as does the economy in general: between the subject and the object, there is ‘need’; between the need and the desire, there is ‘anaclisis’ (the same as in linguistic economy: between the signifier and the signified, or between the sign and the world, there is, or is not, a ‘motivation’). All these layer- ings have the discrete charm of an insoluble science: if the articulation is impossible, it is because the terms have been badly formulated, because their very position is untenable. Somewhere, doubtless, the autonomi- sation of desire in the face of need, of the signifier in the face of the signified, and of the subject in the face of the object, is only an effect of science. But the economies that follow from all this have a hard time, since they do not want to renounce the regular oppositions by which they live: desire–need, unconscious-conscious, primary–secondary process, and so on. Is the pleasure principle itself anything other than the psychoana- lytic reality principle? It is certain, however, that psychoanalysis has given the signifier–signified relation an almost poetic slant. The signifier, instead of manifesting the signified in its presence, is in an inverse relation with it: it signifies the sig- nified in its absence and its repression, in accordance with a negativity that never used to appear in linguistic economy. The signifier is in a necessary (not an arbitrary) relation with the signified, but only as the presence of something is with its absence. It signifies the lost object and takes the place of this loss. 245 The Extermination of the Name of God The concept of representation could hardly, in psychoanalysis, be situated between an objective reality on the one hand and its signifying figuration on the other, but rather between an hallucinated reality, a mnemic image of a lost object of satisfaction, on the one hand, and a substitute-object on the other, whether it is a formula-object like that constituted by the phantasm, or an instrumental contraption such as the fetish may be. (S. Leclaire, Psychanalyser [Paris: Seuil, 1968], p. 65) Linguistic equivalence is lost, since the signifier is instead of and in the place of something else which no longer is, nor has it ever been. It is always there- fore what it no longer is. The fetish-object, in its vacillating identity, is the endless metaphoric series of what is permanently denied: the absence of the phallus in the mother, sexual difference. The removal of identifying marks from psychoanalytic signification in relation to linguistics is well formulated by Mannoni: By introducting the signifier, we make meaning lose its balance. This is not because the signifier brings with it a collection of signifieds of the sort that a semantics of the traditional type might locate them, but because we interpret Saussure’s ellipsis as if it kept the place of the signified empty, a place which can only become full again in the different discourses in which a single signifier is then the common element ... If we also uncouple the signifier from the weight of the signified, it is not in order to give it over to the laws which linguistics discovers in every manifest discourse, but in order that it may be said to obey the law of the primary process, by means of which it escapes, if only for a hesitant moment, the apparent constraints of a discourse that always tends towards the univocal, even though it exploits the equivocal. (‘L’ellipse et la barre’, p. 46) A remarkable passage. But what is this ‘blank’ signified that successive dis- courses will fill? What is a signifier ‘liberated’ so as to be given over to another order? Can we take this ‘play’ from the linguistic categories of the signifier and the signified without shattering the bar which separates them? The bar is the strategic element which establishes both the principle of non-contradiction in the sign, and its components, as values. This is a coherent structure, so we cannot inject just anything into it (such as ambivalence, contradiction, or the primary process). Benveniste puts things clearly into focus in his critique of Freud’s Gegensinn der Urworte (‘On the antithetical meaning of primal words’, 1910, Standard Edition, Vol. 11, 1957, pp. 155ff): It is thus improbable a priori that … languages, however archaic they are assumed to be, escape the ‘principle of contradiction’. Let us suppose that a language exists in which ‘large’ and ‘small’ are expressed identically, then the distinction between ‘large’ and ‘small’ literally has no meaning. For it is indeed contradictoriness to impute to a language both a knowledge of two notions as opposite while, at the same time, the expression of these notions as identical. (E. Benveniste, Problems in General Linguistics [tr. Mary Elizabeth Meek, Miami: University of Miami Press, 1971], p. 71) And this is correct: ambivalence is never part of linguistic signification. ‘It being proper for language to express only what it is possible to express’, it is as absurd to imagine a meaning that would not be conveyed by some Symbolic Exchange and Death246 distinction, as it is on the other hand, to imagine a signifier that would mean everything: To imagine a state of language ... in which a certain object would be denomi- nated as being itself and, at the same time, something else, and in which the relation expressed would be a relation of permanent contradiction, in which everything would be itself and something else, and hence neither self nor the other, is to imagine a pure chimera. (ibid., pp. 71–2) Benveniste knows what he is talking about, since all linguistic rationalisation is there in order to prevent precisely this. There is no risk of the ambivalence of the repressed rising to the surface of linguistic science, since the latter is in its entirety a part of the repressing agency. But within its own order, linguistic science is right: nothing will ever participate in language that does not obey the principles of non-contradiction, identity and equivalence. It is not a matter of saving linguistics, it is a matter of seeing that Benveniste is clear-sighted concerning the choice to be made here (more- over, he is only clear-sighted here because it is a matter of protecting his field from incursions from other fields – he tolerates the existence of a ‘symbolic area’ somewhere else, but this area ‘is discourse, not language’ – stay at home and language will be well protected!): we cannot be content to ‘interpret’ the Saussurian ellipsis and bar in order to return the sign to the primary process, to bring it under analysis. The entire architecture of the sign must be demolished, even its equation must be broken, and it is not enough merely to multiply the unknown factors. Alternatively, then, we must assume that psychoanalysis still makes room somewhere for a certain mode of signification and representation, a certain mode of value and expression: this is in fact precisely what Mannoni’s ‘empty’ signified stands for – the place of the signified remains marked as that of the mobile contents of the unconscious. If therefore we are, with the psychoanalytic signifier, beyond all logical equivalence, we are not, for all that, outside nor beyond value. For in its ‘hesitation’ [trébuchement], it always designates what it represents as value in absentia, under the sign of repression. Value is no longer logically con- veyed by the signifier, it haunts it phantasmatically. The bar separating them has changed its meaning, but it remains nevertheless: there indeed remains a potential signified (a repressed signifier with an unresolved value content) on the one hand, and a signifier, itself an instance established as such by repression, on the other. In fact, there is no longer any equivalence, but equally, there is no more ambivalence, that is, dissolution of value. Here lies the difference with the poetic, where the loss of value is radical. There is no more value in the poetic, not even absent or repressed, to nourish a residual signifier in the form of a symptom, a phantasm, or a fetish. The fetish-object is not poetic, precisely because it is opaque, more saturated with value than any other, because the signifier is not disintegrated in it but, on the con- trary, is fixed, crystallised by a value that is for ever buried and for ever hallucinated as a lost reality. There is no longer a means of unblocking 247 The Extermination of the Name of God the system, forever caught fast in the obsession with meaning, in the fulfil- ment of a perverse desire that comes to fill the empty form of the object with meaning. In the poetic (the symbolic) the signifier disintegrates abso- lutely, whereas in psychoanalysis it endlessly shifts under the effect of the primary processes and is distorted following the folds of repressed values. Whether distorted, transversal or in ‘points de capiton’ (as Lacan says), the psychoanalytic signifier remains a surface indexed on the turbulent reality of the unconscious, whereas in the poetic it diffracts and radiates in the anagrammatic process; it no longer falls under the blows of the law that erects it, nor under the blows of the repressed which binds it, it no longer has anything to designate, not even the ambivalence of a repressed signified. It is nothing more than the dissemination and the absolution of value, expe- rienced, however, without the shadow of anxiety, in total enjoyment. The illumination of the work of art or the symbolic act comes from the point of the non-repressed, the point of no return, where the repression and the incessant repetition of meaning in the phantasm or the fetish, the incessant repetition of the prohibition and value, are lifted, where death and the dissolution of meaning play without hindrance. ‘Grasp in what has been written a symptom of what has been silenced’ (Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil [tr. R.J. Hollingdale, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1990]). A psychoanalytic proposition par excellence: everything that ‘means’ something (particularly scientific dis- course in its ‘transparency’) has the function of silencing. And what it silences comes back to haunt it in an easy-going but irreversible subver- sion of its discourse. This is the place of the psychoanalytic, in the non-place relative to every logical discourse. The poetic, however, silences nothing, and does not come back to haunt it. For it is always death that is repressed and silenced. It is actual- ised here in the sacrifice of meaning. The nothing, death, absence, is overtly stated and resolved: death is manifest at last, and is at last symbol- ised, whereas it is only symptomatic in all other formations of discourse. This, of course, signals the decline of all linguistics, which thrives on the bar of equivalence between what is said and what is meant, but it is also the end of psychoanalysis which, for its part, lives off the bar of repression between what is said and what is silenced, repressed, denied, phantas- matic and infinitely repeated in the mode of denial or de-negation: death. When, in a social formation or a formation of discourse, death speaks, is spoken and exchanged in a symbolic apparatus, psychonalysis no longer has anything more to say. When Rimbaud says, of his Saison en enfer, ‘it is true literally, and in every sense’, this also means that there is no hidden, latent, meaning, that nothing is repressed, that there is nothing behind it, that there is nothing for psychoanalysis. It is at this price that every meaning is possible. Linguistics originates from the bar it has installed between the signifier and the signified, and their reunion spells its death. (Mannoni, ‘L’ellipse et la barre’, p. 35) Symbolic Exchange and Death248 Psychoanalysis too, originates from the bar it has installed, under the law of castration and repression, between what is said and what is silenced (or ‘between an hallucinated reality … and a substitute-object’ – Leclaire, Psychanalyser, p. 65), and for it, too, their reunion spells death. That there is no residue signifies that there is no longer a signifier and a signified, no signified behind the signifier, no structural bar distributing them on either side; it also signifies that there is no longer a repressed agency beneath a repressing agency (as there is in psychoanalysis), no longer a latent beneath a manifest, nor the primary processes playing hide-and-seek with the secondary processes. There is no signified, of whatever sort, produced by the poem, no more there is a ‘dream thought’ behind the poetic text, nor a signifying formula (Leclaire), nor any kind of libido or potential energy which somehow threads its way through the primary processes and would still testify to a productive economy of the unconscious. There is no more a libidinal than there is a political economy, nor of course than there is a linguistic economy, that is to say, a political economy of language. Because the economic, wherever it is, is based on the remainder (only the remainder permits production and reproduc- tion), 13 whether this remainder is that which is symbolically non-distributed and which re-enters commercial exchange and the cir- cuit of commodity equivalence; whether this remainder is what is not exhausted in the anagrammatic circulation of the poem and enters the circuit of signification; or whether this remainder is quite simply the phantasm, that is to say, that which could not be resolved in the ambiv- alent exchange and death, and which, for this reason, is resolved as the precipitate of unconscious individual value, the repressed stock of scenes or representations which is produced and reproduced in accordance with the incessant compulsion to repeat. Market value, signified value and unconscious/repressed value are all produced from what remains, from the residual precipitate of the symbolic operation. It is always this remainder that is accumulated and that fuels the diverse economies that govern our lives. To pass beyond economics (and if ‘to change life’ has any meaning, it can only be this) is to exterminate this remainder in all domains. The poetic is the model of this, since it operates without equivalence, accumulation, or residue. To come back to the Witz: can we not assume that enjoyment is the effect of ‘economising’, of gaining potential due to the ‘ellipsis of psychical distance’, or the irruption of the primary process into the order of dis- course, the irruption of a meaning beneath a meaning, or the deeper reality imposed by the presumed duality of the psychical agencies? Can we not assume that the finality of the ‘other scene’ to come is produced by twisting this latter around, the finality of the return of the repressed as the psychical value of the very separation of the agencies (topographical hypothesis), and the corollary of a binding and an unbinding of energies from which, at a given moment, there would result the libidinal surplus value called enjoyment (economic hypothesis)? 249 The Extermination of the Name of God Can we not assume that enjoyment happens on the contrary at the end of the separation of the separate fields, that it arises out of the very discrim- ination of the agencies, and therefore from the differential play of investments, and therefore from within the logical order of psychoanalysis? Is this the effect of the conflagration, the short-circuit (Kurzschluss) tele- scoping between separate fields (phonemes, words, roles, institutions) that until then had meaning only due to their separation, and that lose their mean- ing in this brutal reconciliation that causes them to be exchanged? Is this not the Witz, the effect of enjoyment where the separated subject is also lost, not only in the reflexive distance of consciousness, but also as regards the agency of the unconscious? The abolition of the super-ego at this moment, of the effort to maintain the discipline of the reality principle and the rationality of meaning, does not merely signify the effacement of the repressing agency to the advantage of the repressed agency, it signifies the simultaneous effacement of both. This is where we find something of the poetic in the Witz and the comical, something beyond the compulsive resurrection of the phantasm and the fulfilment of desire. Freud cites Kant saying ‘Das Komische ist eine in nichts zergangene Erwartung’ (‘[The comic is] a tense expectation that suddenly vanished, [transformed] into nothing’). 14 In other words: where there used to be some- thing, now there is nothing – not even the unconscious. Where there used to be some kind of finality (albeit unconscious), or even a value (albeit repressed), now there is nothing. Enjoyment is the haemorrhage of value, the disintegration of the code, the repressive logos. In the comic, the moral imperative of institutional codes (situations, roles, social characters) is lifted; in the Witz, the moral imperative of the identity principle of words themselves, and even the subject, is eliminated – for nothing, and certainly not in order to ‘express’ the ‘unconscious’. Lichtenberg’s definition of the knife (or the non-knife: an inspired and radically poetic witticism) retraces this explosion of meaning with no ulterior motive. A knife exists insofar as a blade and a handle exist and can be named separately. If the separation between the two is removed (and the blade and handle can only be reunited in their disappearance, as in Lichtenberg’s joke), then, strictly speaking, there is no longer anything but enjoyment. The ‘expectation’ of the knife, Kant said, the practical expectation, as well as the phantasmatic expectation (we know what the knife can ‘mean-to-say’ [vouloir-dire]) is resolved into nothing. And this is not a primary process (displacement, condensation); there is no irruption of something from behind the blade and the handle, there is nothing behind this nothing. End of separation, end of the unconscious. Total resolution, total enjoyment. The example of Lichtenberg is not an exceptional case. If we take a good look at them, all the examples of absurd logic (which is the limit of the Witz, and the point at which enjoyment is at its most acute) chosen by Freud – the cauldron, the cake, the salmon mayonnaise, cats that have two holes cut in their skin precisely at the place where their eyes are, the child that, as soon as it comes into the world, is fortunate to find a mother to take Symbolic Exchange and Death250 care of it – all these examples can be analysed in the same way, as the redu- plication of an identity or a rationality that turns back on itself in order to disintegrate and be eliminated, as the reabsorption of a signifier into itself without a trace of meaning. ‘Eifersucht ist eine Leidenschaft, die mit Eifer sucht, was Leiden schafft’ (an untranslatable Witz: ‘jealousy is a passion that with eagerness seeks what causes pain’). Multiple use of the same material, thus pleasure from the deduction of energy? But Freud himself admits that the multiple use of the same material is also the most difficult to accomplish – the simplest still being saying two different things with the aid of different signifiers. What changes is that the two things are said simultaneously. But the essential thing then is the abolition of the time the signifier takes to unfold, its suc- cessivity: pleasure derives not from the addition of signifieds under the same signifier (economistic interpretation), but from the elimination of the logical time of enunciation, which amounts to the cancellation of the signi- fier itself (anti-economistic interpretation). Moreover, the ‘Eifersucht’ Witz constitutes a proper Saussurian coupling: it realises, at the level of a phrase and its ‘anti-phrase’, what Saussure said of every vowel and its counter- vowel in a line. Here the rule operates at the level of an entire syntagma, whereas in Saussure it operates only on non-signifying elements (phonemes or diphones), but the spark of pleasure, the Witz or the poem, always derives from the same rule of the signifier’s revolution around itself. Meaning, the ‘wealth’ of meaning or of multiple meanings does not matter. Quite the opposite: the signified often makes the pleasure of the Witz rel- atively slight, and signifieds come to end the game to safeguard meaning. Whereas, in the infinitesimal lapse of time as the signifier turns back on itself, in the time of this cancellation, there is an infinity of meaning, a vir- tuality of infinite substitution, a crazy and ultra-fast expenditure, an instantaneous short-circuit of all messages, but always non-signified. Meaning has not ‘taken’: it remains in a state of centrifugal circulation, ‘revolution’; incessantly given and returned like goods in symbolic exchange, they never fall under the authority of value. Freud often speaks of ‘joke-technique’, which he distinguishes from the basic process in this way: [The joke-technique consists in] the use of the same name twice, once as a whole and again divided up into separate syllables ... in the manner of a riddle. (Standard Edition, Vol. 8, 1960, p. 31) But this is nothing but ‘technique’. The same goes for the multiple use of the same material: all these techniques can be summarised under a single category, that is, condensation: The multiple use of the same material is ... a special case of condensation; play upon words is nothing other than a condensation without substi- tute-formation; condensation remains the wider category. All these techniques are dominated by a tendency to compression, or rather to saving. It all seems to be a question of economy. In Hamlet’s words: ‘Thrift, thrift, Horatio!’ (ibid., p. 42) 251 The Extermination of the Name of God What Freud neglects here is that the ‘techniques’ of the Witz are by them- selves sources of pleasure. He affirms this, but only, however, in order to add, as quickly as possible: We now see that what we have described as the techniques of jokes ... are rather the sources from which jokes provide pleasure … The technique which is characteristic of jokes and peculiar to them, however, consists in their procedure for safeguarding the use of these methods for providing pleasure against the objections raised by criticism, which would put an end to the pleasure … Their function consists from the first in lifting internal inhibitions and in making sources of pleasure fertile which have been ren- dered inaccessible by those inhibitions, (ibid., p. 130). Thus everything that might have arisen from the procedure of the Witz itself is referred back to an original ‘source’ for which the Witz is no longer anything other than a technical medium. The same schema applies to the pleasure of recognising and remembering: This rediscovery of what is familiar is pleasurable, and once more it is not difficult for us to recognise this pleasure as a pleasure in economy and to relate it to economy in psychical expenditure … recognition is pleasurable in itself – i.e., through relieving psychical expenditure … Rhymes, alliterations, refrains, and other forms of repeating similar verbal sounds which occur in verse, make use of the same source of pleasure – the rediscovery of something familiar, (ibid., pp. 121–2). Again, these techniques, ‘which show so much similarity to that of “multiple use” in the case of jokes’ (ibid., p. 122), have no meaning in themselves: they are subordinated to the resurgence of a mnemic content (conscious or uncon- scious: amongst other things, it may be an originary or childhood phantasm), of which these techniques are only the means of expression.15 Like the poetic, every interpretation of the Witz in terms of the ‘liber- ation’ of phantasms or psychical energy is false. When the signified begins to erupt and circulate in every sense (the simultaneity of signifieds from different levels of the psychical apparatus, the transversality of the signifier under the pressure of the primary processes), we do not laugh and we do not enjoy: there is only anguish, hallucination and madness. Ambiguity and polysemia produce anguish, because the obsession with meaning (the moral law of signification) remains in its entirety, whereas a single, clear meaning no longer responds. Enjoyment, on the contrary, comes from what every imperative, every reference to meaning (manifest or latent) has swept aside, and this is only possible in an exact reversibil- ity of all meaning – not in the proliferation, but in the meticulous reversal of all meaning. The same goes for energy: neither its ‘explosive’ liberation, its unbinding, its solitary drift, nor its intensity is enjoyment. Reversibility is the only source of enjoyment. 16 When we laugh or enjoy, it is because, in one way or another, a twisting or distortion of the signifier or energy has managed to create a void. Thus the story of someone who loses his key in a dark alley and is looking for it under the street light, because this is the only chance he has of finding it. Symbolic Exchange and Death252 The lost key can be given every hidden meaning (mother, death, phallus castration, etc.), all undecidable for that matter, but this is unimportant: the void of logical reason is reduplicated exactly in order to be destroyed, and it is in the void thus created that the laugh and enjoyment burst out (not, however, in order that this void ‘emerges from its subsoil and establishes itself’ – Lyotard). Freud puts this extremely well: Entfesselung des Unsinns – the unleashing of nonsense. But nonsense is not the hidden hell of meaning [sens], nor the emulsion of all the repressed and contradictory meanings. It is the meticulous reversibility of every term – subversion through reversal. It is by means of the internal logic of the Witz that one of its ‘external’ characteristics must be interpreted: it shares itself out, it does not consume itself alone, it is meaningful only in exchange. The flash of wit or the funny story are like symbolic goods, like champagne, presents, rare goods, or women in primitive societies. The Witz provokes laughter, or the reciprocity of another funny story, or even a veritable potlach of stories in succession. We know the symbolic network of complicity that bind certain stories or jokes, that go from one to the other as poetry used to. Here, everything answers to the symbolic obligation. To keep a funny story to oneself is absurd, not to laugh is offensive, but to laugh first at one’s own story also shatters the subtle laws of exchange in its own way.17 The Witz is necessarily inscribed in a symbolic exchange because it is bound to a symbolic (rather than an economic) mode of enjoyment. If this was a matter of ‘psychical saving’, we fail to see why everyone does not laugh alone, or is not the first to laugh with all this ‘liberated’ psychical energy. There must, therefore, have been something other than unconscious economic mechanisms to compel reciprocity. This something else is pre- cisely the symbolic cancellation of value. It is because terms are symbolically exchanged, that is to say become reversible and are cancelled in their own operations, that the poetic and the Witz institute a social relation of the same type. Only subjects dispossessed of their identity, like words, are devoted to social reciprocity in laughter and enjoyment. An Anti-Materialist Theory of Language We see the outline, in the psychoanalytic interpretation of the dream, of the Witz, of neuroses and, by extension, of poetry, of a ‘materialist’ theory of language. The work of the primary process is possible because the uncon- scious treats words as things. The signifier, escaping the horizon and the finality of the signified, becomes pure material once more, available for another labour, an ‘elementary’ material available for the foldings, trans- ports and telescopings of the primary process. The phonemic substance of language takes on the immanence of the material thing, lapsing back into (if these formulae have any meaning at all) primary articulation (signifying units), perhaps even into secondary articulation (distinct units). Sounds (or even letters) are then conceived as the atoms of a substance no different from that of the body. 253 The Extermination of the Name of God It may seem that there was an unsurpassable radicality of language here. To treat words ‘as things’ would be in principle the fundamental operation of language, since it seems that we have the last word when we finally draw out a ‘materialist’ base. But the same goes for materialism as it does for everything else. The philosophical destiny of this theory is to operate a simple overturning of idealism, without surpassing endless speculation, by simply alternating between the two. Hence the concepts of ‘thing’ and of ‘matter’, negatively forged by idealism as its own hell, its negative phan- tasm, have passed silently into a positively real phase, indeed into a revolutionary explanatory principle, while losing none of the abstraction that they inherit from their origins. Idealism has created, in repression, the phantasm of a certain ‘matter’ which, laden with all the stigmata of idealist repression, re-emerges as materialism. Let’s undertake a thorough examina- tion of the concept of the ‘thing’ by means of which we would like to delimit a beyond of representation. Having evacuated all transcendence, there remains a crude, opaque and ‘objective’ matter, a substantial entity, a molar or molecular base of rocks or of language. But do we not see that idealism’s last and most subtle resort is to have locked what it denied into this irreducible substantiality, to legitimate it as an adverse referent, as an alibi, and thus to disarm it as an ‘effect’ of reality which becomes the best support for idealist thought. The ‘thing’, ‘substance’, ‘infrastructure’ and ‘matter’ have never had any other meaning. Even the ‘materialist’ theory of language falls into the same trap of idealist interdependence. It is not true that words, when they cease to be representations and lose the sign’s ratio- nale, become ‘things’, thus incarnating a more fundamental status of objectivity, a surplus reality, a rediscovered stage of final appeal. There is no worse miscomprehension. To treat words ‘as things’ ... in order to express THE thing – the Unconscious – in order to materialise a latent energy. Expression always falls into the trap, unless it is the repressed, the unsaid (perhaps the unsay- able that here becomes a positive reference), of assuming the force of an authority, an agency, rather than a substance. Western thought cannot bear, and has at bottom never been able to bear, a void of signification, a non- place and a non-value. It requires a topography and an economics. The radical reabsorption of the sign inaugurated in the poetic (and doubtless in the Witz as well) has to become the decipherable sign of an unsaid, of some- thing that perhaps will never give up its code, but that thereby merely augments its value. Of course, I understand that psychoanalysis is not a ‘vulgar’ hermeneutics: it is a more subtle hermeneutics in that something else – another world, another scene – is always going on behind the opera- tion of the material signifier, whose twists and turns can always be captured by a specialist discourse. Enjoyment is never purely and simply consump- tion or consummation. The libido always becomes metabolic in this operation, it always speaks from the depths of phantasm it always releases affects. In short, linguistic material is already finalised by a positive trans- formation (here a transcription), it always warrants an interpretation, which Symbolic Exchange and Death254 envelops it as its analytic reason. 18 The ‘Thing’ hides itself and hides some- thing else. To look for the force is to look for the signifier. A profound motivation of the sign-symptom, a consubstantiality of word and thing, of the fate of language and the fate of the pulsion, the figure and the force. A libidinal economy whose principle is always to metaphorise (or metonymise) the unconscious, the body, the libido and the phantasm in a linguistic disorder. In linguistic motivation, it is always the arbitrary charac- ter of the sign that yields to the positive analogy of the signifier and the thing signified. In psychoanalytic motivation, it is a reverse necessity that binds the deconstructed signifier to a primary energetic potential. Here motivation appears as the transgression of a form by an insurrectional con- tent. The blind surreality of the libido punctures language’s reality principle and its transparency. This is how, in the best cases, the poetic is interpreted: Luciano Berio’s organic sound, Artaud’s theatre of cruelty, groans, screams and gasps, the incantation and irruption of the body into the repressive interiorised space of language. The irruption of the partial pulsions consti- tutes a partial surface under the seal of repression, simultaneously transgressive and regressive, for this is precisely only the revolution of a repressed con- tent, marked as such by the hegemony of form. This is better than Swinburne’s breeze, but it still has to do with motivation and metaphor: a vitalist, energetic, corporealist metaphor of the theatre of cruelty. Therefore, in the final analysis, it is a finalist met- aphor, even if it is a matter of a savage finality. The magic of a ‘liberation’ of an original force (we know Artaud’s often shocking affinity with magic and exorcism, and even, in Héliogabale, with orgiastic mysticism). Metaphysics is always at the crossroads, as it is at the crossroads of the economic-energetic view of the unconscious processes (put simply, that is, the concept of the unconscious): the metaphysical temptation to make the unconscious as substantial as a body, and thus the finality of its liberation. The contemporary illusion of the repression that forms the unconscious as a content, as a force. Form triumphs by circumscribing what it denies as content, and delimiting it within a finality of the expression of content or the resurrection of forces. On this point, there is not so much difference between linguistics and psychoanalysis, since in both there is always the same attempt to base the poetic in the connaturality of the discourse and its object: The distance from words to things is altered by the use made of the ‘thing’ in the word, by the mediation of its flesh and the echoes its flesh might make, in the caverns of sensibility, of the rumbling created by the thing. (J.-F. Lyotard, Discours, figure [Paris: Klincksieck, 1971], p. 77) Thus the linguists try – at best – to preserve the ‘symbolic’ value of sound against the thesis of the arbitrary. Further on, Lyotard writes: The thing is not ‘introduced into’ language, but its linguistic arrangement spreads it out over words, and between them, the rhythms consonant with those that the thing discussed in the discourse sets up in our body, (ibid., pp. 77–8) 255 The Extermination of the Name of God What miracle makes the ‘thing’ consonant with the word through the medium of the body? Not rhythm, but metaphor. In effect, this is a matter of a positive economy of the metaphor: the idea of a reconciliation between the ‘thing’ and the word given back its materiality. But this is false. If it is true that logical discourse denies the materiality of the word (the Wortkörper), the poetic is not, by means of a simple inversion, the resur- rection of the word as thing. Far from making the thing appear, it aims to destroy language itself as a thing. The poetic is precisely the mutual vol- atilisation of the status of thing and discourse. That is to say that it aims at the extermination of language as discourse, but also as materiality; not by repressing it as discourse does, but by taking it to task to the point of annihilating it. This is how even Kristeva, following Heraclitus and Lucretius, states a materialist theory of the signifier: words do not express the (movement of the) real, they are it. Not by means of the mediation of ideas, but through the consubstantiality (which is more than a ‘correspondence’) between the material thing and the phonemic substance of language. Homologous to psychoanalysis: if language makes the unconscious visible, it is not because it expresses it, but because it is of the same structure, and because it is articulated and speaks in the same way. The same cut, the same scene, the same ‘way’, and the same work. Where the Ancients used to say ‘fire’, we say ‘language, the unconscious, the body’. But to say that language makes fire, air, water and earth (or the work of the unconscious) visible because it is itself an element, an elementary sub- stance in direct affinity with all the others, is at once more radical than all the psycho-naturalists’ ‘motivation’, and also very far from the truth. The whole thing needs to be reversed: it is on condition that we see that fire, water, earth and air are neither values nor positive elements, that they are metaphors of the continual dissolution of value, of the symbolic exchange of the world – on condition that we see that they are not substances but anti-substances, anti-matter – this is the sense in which language may be said to reunite them, as soon as it has been torn from the logic of the sign and value. This is what the ancient myths (and the Heraclitean and Nietzschean myth of becoming) used to say about the elements, and it is in this sense that they are poetic, and even superior to every analytic interpre- tation that transposes this dissolution into the hidden instance of the unsaid, ‘transpearing’ in a no-saying or a saying-other. There is no materialist reference in the symbolic operation, not even an ‘unconscious’ one; rather there is the operation of an ‘anti-matter’. We are wary of science-fiction, but it is true that there is some analogy between a particle and an anti-particle, whose encounter would result in their mutual annihilation (along with, moreover, a fabulous energy), and the principle of the vowel and its counter-vowel in Saussure, or, in more gen- eral terms, between any given signifier and the anagrammatic double that eliminates it: here again, nothing remains but a fabulous enjoyment. Kristeva writes: Symbolic Exchange and Death256 In this other space, where logical laws of speech have been weakened, the subject dissolves and, in place of the sign, the clash of signifiers eliminating each other is instituted. An operation of generalised negativity, which has nothing to do with the constitutive negativity of the judgement (Aufhebung), nor with the negativity internal to the judgement (binary logic: 0–1), an annihilating negativity (Sunyavada Buddhism). A zerological subject, a non-subject who comes to assume the thought that cancels itself. (‘Poésie et négativité’, p. 212) Beyond the Unconscious The question is this: is there room to offer an hypothesis of the unconscious – this energy and affective potential which, in its repression and in its labour, lies at the basis of the ‘expressive’ disturbance and dislocation of the order of discourse, and opposes its primary to its secondary processes – an hypothesis in terms of the poetic process? Evidently everything hangs together: if the unconscious is this irreversible agency, then the duality of the primary and the secondary processes is also irreducible, and the work of meaning can only consist in the return of the repressed, in its transpearance in the repressing agency of discourse. In this regard, there is no difference between the poetic and the neurotic, between the poem and the lapsus. We take note of psycho- analysis’s radicalism: if the primary processes ‘exist’, they are at work every- where, and are determinant everywhere. Conversely, however, the mere hypothesis of a different order, a symbolic order that provided the economy of the unconscious, prohibition and repression and which basically resolved the distinction between the primary and the secondary processes, is enough to relativise the whole psychoanalytic perspective, and not only on those marginal territories over which it imperialistically encroaches (anthropology, poetics, politics, etc.), but on its own terrain, in the analysis of the psyche, neurosis and the cure. To turn to Mannoni again, it cannot be ruled out that psychoanalysis, which originates from the distinction between the primary and the secondary processes, will one day die when this distinction is abol- ished. The symbolic is already beyond the psychoanalytic unconscious, beyond libidinal economy, just as it is beyond value and political economy. We must see that the symbolic processes (reversibility, anagrammatic dispersal, reabsorption without residue) are not at all mixed up with the primary processes (displacement, condensation, repression). They are mutu- ally opposed, even if together they are opposed to the logical discourse of meaning. This singular difference (also as regards enjoyment) means that a dream, a lapsus, or a joke is not a work of art or a poem. The difference between the symbolic and the libidinal unconscious, today largely effaced by the privilege of psychoanalysis, must be re-established to prohibit psycho- analysis from encroaching where it has nothing to say. Concerning the poetic (the work of art), the symbolic and (primitive) anthropology neither Marx nor Freud has been able to say anything unless either has reduced it to the mode of production on the one hand, and to repression and castration on the other. Where psychoanalysis and Marxism come to grief, we must not 257 The Extermination of the Name of God want to have them fall like angels (or like beasts), they must be pitilessly analysed according to their failures and omissions. Today, the limits of each are the strategic points of every revolutionary analysis. Marx believed that in economics and its dialectical procedure he redis- covered the fundamental agency. In fact, he discovered, throughout many economic convulsions, what systematically haunted it: the very separation of economics as an agency. Running through the economic, breeding con- flict and making it the site of contradictions is the fantastic autonomisation of the economy raised to the level of the reality principle, which these contradictions, however violent, rationalise in their own way. But this is also true of psychoanalysis: here too, in the term of the uncon- scious and the labour of the unconscious, Freud gained possession of what, in the form of the individual psychical apparatus, resulted from the fracture of the symbolic as a fundamental agency. The conflictual relation of the conscious to the unconscious relentlessly translates the haunting of this very separation of the psychical as such. Freudian topography (unconscious, preconscious, conscious) merely formalises, and theorises as an original given, what results from a destructuration. This analysis of Marx and Freud is critical. But neither are critical in rela- tion to the respective separation of their domains. They are not conscious of the rupture that founds them. They are critical symptomatologies that subtly turn their respective symptomatological fields into the determining field. Primary processes, modes of production: ‘radical’ words, irreducible schemata of determination. It is as such that they imperialistically export their concepts. Today, Marxism and psychoanalysis try to mix and exchange their con- cepts. Logically, in fact, if both fell within the province of ‘radical’ critique, they ought to be able to do this. This is not the case, as the failure of the Freudo-Marxian phantasm in all its forms testifies. But the basic reason for the incessant failure of this conceptual transfer, and why both remain des- perate metaphors, is precisely due to the fact that Marxism and psychoanalysis retain their coherence only within their partial definitions (in their ignorance), and cannot therefore be generalised as analytic schemata. A radical theory can be based neither on their ‘synthesis’ nor on their contamination, but only on their respective ex-termination. Marxism and psychoanalysis are in crisis. Rather than supporting one another, their respective crises must be telescoped and speeded up. They may yet do each other great collateral damage. We must not be deprived of this spectacle: they are only critical fields. Notes 1. But ‘forgotten’ and covered over by all linguistics with especial care: it was only at this cost that it could be established as a ‘science’ and ensure its structural monopoly in all directions. 2. For what follows concerning the anagrammatic material we refer to Jean Starobinski, Les mots sous les mots [Paris: Gallimard, 1971]. For the basic rules, see ‘Le souci de la répétition’, pp. 12ff. Symbolic Exchange and Death258 3. The term ‘anathema’ which can just as easily be an immolated victim as it can a conse- crated object, having drifted in the direction of an accursed object or person, should retain all its importance for the rest of this analysis. 4. The same goes for our perception of space and time, which are unthinkable for us in any other way than infinity – a proliferation that corresponds both to their objectification as value and, here too, to the phantasm of an inexhaustible extension or succession. 5. There is a critique to be made here of what Lévi-Strauss, in his Structural Anthropology [2 vols, tr. M. Layton, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977–9], calls ‘symbolic efficacity’ since for him it remains bound (as is the vulgar representation of magic) to the opera- tion of a myth on the body (or on nature) by means of a ‘symbolic’ exchange or corre- spondence of signifieds. For example, the difficult birth: mythic speech remobilises the blocked body along its signified, its content. Instead, the efficacity of the sign must be understood as the resolution of a formula. It is by making the elements of a formula exchange and resolve themselves within this exchange that you induce the same resolu- tion in the sick person’s body: the elements of the body (or of nature) enter once again into exchanges with each other. The impact of signs on the body (or on nature, as in the legend of Orpheus), their operating force, derives precisely from not being ‘value’. There is no rationalisation of the sign in primitive societies, that is to say, there is no separation between its actual operation and a referential signified, no ‘reservoir of meaning’ where analogies would be conveyed. The symbolic operation is not analogical, it resolves, it is revolutionary, and it concerns the materiality of the sign, which it exterminates as value. There being no more value, the sign actualises the ambivalence, therefore the total exchange and total reversibility of meaning. Hence its efficacity, since conflicts, including disease, are only ever resolved in the exchange. Actualising ambivalence, the primitive sign, the ‘effective’ sign, has no unconscious. It is clear, and equal to its manifest operation. It does not operate indirectly, or by analogy, on the repressed or unconscious representation (Lévi-Strauss very clearly leans in this direction, in his comparison with psychoanalysis – ‘The sorcerer and his magic’ – as indeed does all psychoanalytic anthropology). It is its own operation, with no residue, and this is how it operates on the world, this is why it is the direct operation of the world. 6. There again the residue of the analysis fuels the field of ‘knowledge’, the construc- tive Eros of ‘science’, in exactly the same way as the residues of the poetic become enmeshed in the field of communication. Science and discourse speculate on this res- idue in their imaginary, where they produce their ‘surplus-value’ and establish their power. What is not analysed and radically resolved in the symbolic operation is what is frozen under the death-mask of value – the beginning of the culture of death and accumulation. 7. But the disappearance of every coherent signified is not sufficient to produce the poetic. If this were the case, then a lexical madness would be sufficient, or an aleatory auto- matic writing. It is also necessary that the signifier is eliminated in a rigorous, entirely non-aleatory, operation, without which it remains ‘residual’, and its mere absurdity will not save it. In automatic writing, for example, the signified is indeed eliminated (‘it means nothing’ – ça ne veut rien dire) – even though it lives entirely on the nostalgia for the signified, and its pleasure consists in leaving every possible signified to chance – in any case, the signifier is produced here without any control, unresolved, instantaneous waste: the third rule of customary discourse (see above), that of the signifier’s absolute availability, has been neither shattered nor overcome. But the poetic mode involves both the liquidation of the signified, and the anagrammatic resolution of the signifier. 8. The humour in this story is so successful because, if there is one thing on which the inscription of death has not taken, where the death drive is barred, it is cybernetic systems. 9. The same goes, in a certain way, for Freud’s hypothesis of the death drive – its process and its content remain, in accordance with his avowed wishes, ultimately unverifiable 259 The Extermination of the Name of God on the clinical level, but its form, as the principle of mental functioning and the anti- logos, is revolutionary. 10. This is the illusion of being able to separate the two articulations, and eventually extract the one from the other. It is the illusion of being able to rediscover, by splitting the primary, ‘significative’ articulation, the equivalent of non-linguistic signs in language (gestures, sounds, colours). This illusion leads J.-F. Lyotard, in Discours, figure [Paris: Klincksieck, 1971] to grant the level of the visual or the cry an absolute privilege as spontaneous transgression, always already beyond the discursive and closer to the figural. This illusion remains trapped by the very concept of double articulation, whereby the linguistic order again finds a means to establish itself in the interpretation of what escapes it. 11. Careful here: this all holds for psychoanalysis itself, which also thrives on the rupture between primary and secondary processes, and will die at the end of this separation. And it is true that psychoanalysis is ‘revolutionary’ and ‘scientific’ when it explores the entire field of channels from the standpoint of this rupture (in the unconscious). But perhaps we will one day see that real, total and immediate practice does not obey this postulate, or that analytic simulation model; that symbolic practice is from the very first beyond the distinction between primary and secondary processes. To this day, the unconscious and the subject of the unconscious, psychoanalysis and the subject of (psychoanalytic) knowl- edge, has lived – the analytic field will have disappeared as such into the separation that it instituted itself – for the benefit of the symbolic field. We can already see many signs that this has already taken place. 12. This speech has nothing to do with linguistic sense of the word ‘parole’, since the latter is trapped with the langue-parole opposition and is subject to the langue. Undivided (sym- bolic) speech itself denies the langue–parole distinction, just as undivided social practice denies the theory-practice distinction. Only ‘linguistic’ parole says only what it says. But such speech has never existed, unless in the dialogue of the dead. Concrete, actual speech says what it says, along with everything else at the same time. It does not observe the law of the discrete sign and the separation of agencies, it speaks at every level at the same time, or better, it undoes the level of the langue, and thus linguistics itself. The latter, by con- trast, seeks to impose a parole which would be nothing but the execution of the langue, that is to say, the discourse of power. 13. Cf. Charles Malamoud, ‘Sur la notion de reste dans le brahmanisme’, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, Vol. XVI, 1972. 14. [In Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, Freud cites Kant in the following manner: the comic is “an expectation that has turned to nothing”’ (Standard Edition. ed. and tr. James Strachey, London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psychoanalysis, Vol. 8, 1960, p. 199), which he takes from Kant’s Critique of Judgement, tr. Werner Pluhar, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1987, p. 204, from which I have taken the quotation – tr.] 15. It is on the reduction to and the primacy of the economy of the unconscious that the impossiblity of ever really theorising the difference between the phantasm and the work of art rests for Freud. He was able to say that the poets had had the intuition of everything he analysed before him, or even (in Gradiva), that psychiatry has no priv- ilege over the poet and that the latter can very well express, ‘without taking anything away from beauty and its works’ (!) an unconscious problem in all its profundity. The poetic act remains supplementary, sublime but supplementary. J.-F. Lyotard attempts to take Freud up on this point, granting all importance to his distinction between the phantasm and the work of art, while seeking to articulate them rigorously. He first denounces every interpretation in terms of the ‘liberation’ of the phantasm. To liberate the phantasm is absurd, since the latter is a prohibition of desire, and is of the order of repetition (this is in fact what is currently being produced with the ‘liberation’ of the unconscious: they liberate it insofar as it is repressed and forbidden, a liberation, that is to say, under the sign of value, of an inverted surplus-value – but perhaps this is the ‘Revolution’?). Lyotard writes: ‘The artist … struggles to free from the phantasm, from the matrix of figures whose heir and whose locus he is, what really belongs to primary process, and is not a repetition’ (‘Notes on the critical function of the work of art’, in Symbolic Exchange and Death260 Driftworks [New York: Semiotext(e), 1984], p. 74 [translation modified – tr.]). ‘For Freud, art must be situated by reference to the phantasm … only the artist does not hide his phantasms, he gives them the form of effectively real objects, and furthermore [!] the presentation he makes of them is a source of aesthetic pleasure’ (Dérive à partir de Marx et Freud [Paris: UGE, 1973], p. 56). In Lyotard, this theory takes on ‘inverted’ ways: the artist’s phantasm is not produced in reality as the play, the reconciliation, or the fulfilment of desire, it is produced in reality as a counter-reality, it intervenes only in the lack of reality, hollowing out this lack. ‘The function of art is not to offer a real sim- ulacrum of the fulfilment of desire, it is to show, by way of the play of its figures, what deconstruction of the linguistic and perceptual order must be engaged in, in order that a figure of the unconscious order allows itself to be discerned through its very evasiveness (presentation of the primary process)’ (ibid., pp. 57–8). Being the prohibition of desire, however, how can the phantasm suddenly play this subversive role? The same goes for the primary processes: ‘The work of art differs from the dream and the symptom in that in it, the same operations of condensation, displace- ment and figuration that, in the dream and the symptom, have the goal of disguising desire because it is intolerable, are, in expression, used to push back the bonne forme of secondary process and exhibit the “unform”, the unconscious disorder’ (ibid., p. 58). How are we to understand that the primary processes can be reversed in this way? Are they not themselves bound to repressed desire, or are they then the mode of existence of a ‘pur et dur’ unconscious, an unsurpassable, infrastructural unconscious? So Lyotard, who correctly says that ‘one cannot write on the side of the primary processes. Taking the side of the primary process is still an effect of the secondary processes’, would condemn himself. But this is exactly what the artist does: ‘The [artist’s] labour may be assimilated to that of the dream and to the operations of the primary process in general, but the artist repeats them and, in so doing, reverses them, because he applies them to the work of this process itself, that is to say, to the figures that arise from the phantasm’ (ibid., p. 65). And, more radically still: ‘The artist is someone who, in the desire to see death, even at the price of his own death, lends it the upper hand over the desire to produce.’ ‘Disease is not the irruption of the unconscious, it is this irruption and the furious struggle against it. The genius advances as far as the same figure of depth as the sick, but rather than defending himself against it, he desires it’ (ibid., p. 60–61). But where does this acquiesence to the ‘cruelty’ of the unconscious come from, if not a reversal of the ‘will’ from an elusive ‘actual grace’? And where does the enjoyment that emanates from this act come from, which must somehow, of course, stem from the form, and not from the content. Form, for Lyotard, is not far removed from the mystics’ void. The artist will contrive ‘a deconstructed space’, a void, a structure receptive to phantas- matic irruption: ‘meaning comes about through the violation of discourse, it is a force or a gesture in the field of significations, it remains silent. And in this hole the repressed word merges from its subsoil and establishes itself. This void, this silence – the calming before the irruption – constitutes a dangerous analogy with mystical processes. But where, above all, do they proceed from? What is the process of ‘deconstruction’? We soon see that it has nothing to do with the primary process – on which we here impose an incomprehensible double role: it is both sides of the reversal. Would we not do better here, frankly, to leave repression and repetition to one side, and to clear the poetic act of all psychoanalytic counter-dependence? 16. Pleasure, satisfaction and the fulfilment of desire belong to the economic order: enjoy- ment belongs to the symbolic order. We must make a radical distinction between the two. No doubt saving, recognition, psychical ellipsis and compulsive repetition are sources of a certain (somehow entropic, involutive) pleasure, simultaneously heimlich and unheimlich, familiar and disturbing, an endless source of anguish, since it is bound to the repetition of the phantasm. The economic is always accumulative and repetitive. The symbolic is the reversal, the resolution of accumulation and repetition; the resolution of the phantasm. 261 The Extermination of the Name of God 17. Freud thinks, remaining within the logic of economic interpretation, that if one is not the first to laugh, it is because the initiative for the Witz requires a certain psychical expend- iture, and is therefore, moreover, unavailable for pleasure. He himself admits that this is not very satisfactory. 18. All matter is raw material. That is to say, that its concept only appears dependent on the appearance of the order of production. All those who would like to be ‘materialists’ (scientific, semiotic, historical, dialectical, etc.) ought to remember this. Even the sen- sationalist materialism of the eighteenth century is the first step towards a ‘liberation’ of the body in accordance with the pleasure-function, as raw material in the production of pleasure. Matter is only ever a force of production. But production itself is hardly ‘materialist’ at all – nor, moreover, is it idealist. It is an order and a code, and that’s all there is to it. The same goes for science: it is an order and a code, no more or less ‘materialist’ than magic or anything else.  FORGET FOUCAULT Forget Foucault FOUCAULT'S WRITING is perfect in that the very movement of the text gives an admirable account of what it proposes : on one hand, a powerful generating spiral that is no longer a despotic architecture but a filiation en abyme, coil and strophe without origin (without catastrophe, either), unfolding ever more widely and rigorously; but on the other hand, an interstitial flowing of power that seeps through the whole porous network of the social, the mental, and of bodies, infinitesimally modulating the technologies of power (where the relations of power and seduction are inextricably entangled) . All this reads directly in Foucault's discourse (which is also a discourse of power) . It flows, it invests and saturates the entire space it opens . The smallest qualifiers find their way into the slightest interstices of meaning; clauses and chapters wind into spirals; a magistral art of decentering allows the opening of new spaces (spaces of power and of dis course) which are immediately covered up by the meticulous outpouring of Foucault's writing. There's no vacuum here, no phantasm, no backfiring, but a fluid objectivity, a nonlinear, orbital, and flawless writing. The meaning never exceeds what one says of it; no dizziness, yet it never floats in a text too big for it: no rhetoric either. 29 In short, Foucault's discourse is a mirror of the powers it describes. It is there that its strength and its seduction lie, and not at all in its "truth index," which is only its leitmotiv: these proce dures of truth are of no importance, for Foucault's discourse is no truer than any other. No, its strength and its seduction are in the analysis which unwinds the subtle meanderings of its object, describing it with a tactile and tactical exactness, where seduction feeds analytical force and where language itself gives birth to the operation of new powers. Such also is the operation of myth, right down to the symbolic effectiveness described by Levi Strauss. Foucault's is not therefore a discourse of truth but a mythic discourse in the strong sense of the word, and I secretly believe that it has no illusions about the effect of truth it produces. That, by the way, is what is missing in those who follow in Fou cault's footsteps and pass right by this mythic arrangement to end up with the truth, nothing but the truth. THE VERY PERFECTION of this analytical chronicle of power is dis turbing. Something tells us-but implicitly, as if seen in a reverse shot of this writing too beautiful to be true-that if it is possible at last to talk with such definitive understanding about power, sex uality, the body, and discipline, even down to their most delicate metamorphoses, it is because at some point all this is here and now over with. And because Foucault can only draw such an admirable picture since he works at the confines of an area (maybe a "classi cal age, " of which he would be the last great dinosaur) now in the process of collapsing entirely. Such a configuration lends itself to'" the most dazzling display of analysis just before its terms have been recalled. "When I speak of time, that's because it's already no 30 / Forget Foucault lon ger there," said Apollinaire. But if Foucault spoke so well of power to us-and let us not forget it, in real obj ective terms which cover manifold diffractions but nonetheless do not ques tion the obj ective point of view one has about them, and of power which is pulverized but whose reality principle is nonetheless not questioned-only because power is dead? Not merely impossible to locate because of dissemination, but dissolved purely and simply in a manner that still escapes us, dissolved by reversal, cancella tion, or made hyperreal through simulation (who knows?) . Nonetheless, something happened to power which Foucault cannot retrieve once again from deep within his genealogy: for him the political has no end, but only metamorphoses from the "despotic" to the "disciplinary," and at this level to the "micro cellular" according to the same process belonging to the physical and biological sciences. This may constitute enormous progress over the imaginary order of power which dominates us-but nothing has changed concerning the axiom of power: it doesn't exceed its shadow, i.e., the smallest definition of its real function. Power, then, is still turned toward a reality principle and a very strong truth principle; it is still oriented toward a possible coher ence of politics and discourse (power no longer pertains to the despotic order of what is forbidden and of the law, but it still belongs to the obj ective order of the real) . Foucault can thus describe to us the successive spirals of power, the last of which enables him to mark its most minute terminations, although power never ceases being the term, and the question of its exter- . . . mination can never arIse. And what if Foucault spoke to us so well of sexuality (at last an analytical discourse on sex-or a discourse freed from the pathos of sex-that has the textual clarity of discourses which Joan Baudr-illard / 31 precede the discovery of the unconscious and which do not need the "blackmail of the deep" to say what they have to say) , what if he spoke so well of sexuality only because its form, this great pro duction (that too) of our culture, was, like that of power, in the process of disappearing? Sex, like man, or like the category of the social, may only last for a while. And what if sex's reality effect, which is at the horizon of the discourse on sexuality, also started to fade away radically, giving way to other simulacra and dragging down with it the great referents of desire, the body, and the uncon scious-that whole recitative which is so powerful today? Foucault's hypothesis itself suggests how mortal sex is sooner or later. While psychoanalysis seemingly inaugurates the millennium of sex and desire, it is perhaps what orchestrates it in full view before it disap pears altogether. In a certain way, psychoanalysis puts an end to the unconscious and desire, just as Marxism put an end to the class struggle, because it hypostatizes them and buries them in their theoretical project. We have at this point reached the metalanguage of desire in a discourse on sex that has outreached itself by redou bling the signs of sex so as to mask an indeterminacy and a profound disinvestment-the dominant catchword sexual is now equivalent to an inert sexual milieu. It is the same with sex as with politics: "Remember in '68 how many strikes, barricades, speeches and cobblestones it took for people to begin to accept that every thing is political. Pornography, as it proliferates and is censured only to come back stronger, will let them see that everything is sexuality" (Art Press, issue on pornography 1) . There is a double absurdity here (everything is political, everything is sexuality) , a parallel absurdity in these two catchwords at the very moment when politics collapses and when sex itself becomes involuted and disappears as a strong referent in the hyperreality of "liberated" sexuality. 32 / Forget Foucault If, as Foucault states, the bourgeoisie used sex and sexuality to give itself a glorious body and a prestigious truth in order to pass this on then to the rest of society under the guise of truth and banal destiny, it could just be that this simulacrum slips out of its skin and departs with it. Because he remains within the classic formula of sex, Foucault cannot trace this new spiral of sexual simulation in which sex finds a second existence and takes on the fascination of a lost frame of reference* (and this is nothing but the coherence lent by a given configuration to the myth of the unconscious) . Even if he fashions sex into a discursive configura tion, this has its own internal coherence and, j ust like power, it has a positive index of refraction. Discourse is discourse, but the oper ations, strategies, and schemes played out there are real: the hysterical woman, the perverse adult, the masturbating child, the oedipal family. These real, historical devices, machines that have never been tampered with-no more so than the "desiring machines" in their order of libidinal energy-all exist, and the truth is: they have been true. But Foucault cannot tell us anything about the simulating machines that double each one of these "original" machines, about the great simulating mechanism which winds all these devices into a wider spiral, because Foucault's gaze is fixed upon the classic "semiurgy" of power and sex. He does not see the frenzied semiurgy that has taken hold of the simulacrum. Maybe this spiral that erases all others is only a new aspect of desire or power, but this is very unlikely because it breaks down all dis course into these terms. Barthes said of Japan: "There, sexuality is * It may well be that pornography is there only to reactivate this lost referent in order to prove a contrario, by its grotesque hyperrealism, that there is however some real sex somewhere. Jean Baudril!ard / 33 in sex and nowhere else. In the United States, sexuality is every where except in sex."2 And what if sex itself is no longer in sex? We are no doubt witnessing, with sexual liberation, pornography, etc. , the agony of sexual reason. And Foucault will only have given us the key to it when it no longer means anything. The same goes for Discipline and Punish, with its theory of discipline, of the "panop tic" and of "transparence." A magistral but obsolete theory. Such a theory of control by means of a gaze that objectifies, even when it is pulverized into micro-devices, is passe. With the simulation device we are no doubt as far from the strategy of transparence as the latter is from the immediate, symbolic operation of punishment which Foucault himself describes. Once again a spiral is missing here, the spiral in front of which Foucault, oddly enough, comes to a halt right at the threshold of a current revolution of the system which he has never wanted to cross. ON E COULD SAY a lot about the central thesis of the book: there has never been a repression of sex but on the contrary an injunc tion against talking about it or voicing it and a compulsion to confess, to express, and to produce sex. Repression is only a trap and an alibi to hide assigning an entire culture to the sexual imper ative. Supposing we agree with Foucault (note, however, that this assignation need in no way envy good old repression-and what difference does it make whether we say repression or an " induced" mode of speaking? It's only a question of terminology) , what would remain of the book's essential idea? Basically this: it substi-. tutes a negative, reactive, and transcendental conception of power which is founded on interdiction and law for a positive, active, and immanent conception, and this is in fact essential. One can 34 / Forgot Foucault only be struck by the coincidence between this new version of power and the new version of desire proposed by Deleuze and Lyotard: but there, instead of a lack or interdiction, one finds the deployment and the positive dissemination of flows and intensi ties. Such a coincidence is not accidental: it's simply that in Fo ucault power rakes the place of desire. It is there in the same way as desire in Deleuze and Lyotard: always already there, purged of all negativity, a network, a rhizome, a contiguity diffracted ad infinitum. That is why there is no desire in Foucault: its place is already taken (looking at it the other way round, one way wonder if, in the schizoid and libidinal theories, desire or anything along that line is not the anamorphosis of a certain kind of power remaining under the sign of the same immanence, the same posi tivity, and the same machinery going every which way. Better yet, one can even wonder if, from one theory to the other, desire and power don't exchange their figure in ceaseless speculation-in mirror games that are for us games of truth) . These are certainly twin theories to their core; they are syn chronous and isochronous in their "device" (dispositif: a term dear to them) , and their facilitation (frayage: Bahnung) is the same-this is why they can be interchanged so well (see Deleuze's article on Foucault in Critique 3) and can generate as of today all the by-products ("enj oyment of power, " "the desire for capital," etc.) which are exact replicas of the previous generation's by products "the desire of revolution, " "enjoyment of non-power," etc.) . For in those days Reichians & Freudo-Marxists and desire & power were under opposite signs; today micro-desire (that of power) and micro-politics (that of desire) literally merge at the libido's mechanical confines: all one has to do is miniaturize. Such is the spiral Foucault suggests: power/ knowledge/pleasure Jean Baudrillard I 35 (he dare not say desire, although it is desire, the whole theory of desire, which comes directly into question) . Foucault is part of this molecular intertwining which sketches out all of the future's visible hysteria: he has helped establish a systematic notion of power along the same operational lines as desire, just as Deleuze established a notion of desire along the lines of future forms of power. This collusion is too beautiful not to arouse suspicion, but it has in its behalf the quaint innocence of a betrothal. When power blends into desire and desire blends into power, let's forget them both.4 As for the hypothesis concerning repression, it's fine to object to it radically, but not on the basis of a simplistic definition. Yet what Foucault rejects is just such a repression of sex intended to channel all forms of energy toward material production. On this basis, it is too easy to say that the proletariat should have been the first class affected by repression, while history shows that the privileged classes first experienced it. In conclusion, the hypothe sis concerning repression doesn't hold up. But it is the other hypothesis which is interesting: the hypothesis concerning a repression that originates from much farther away than the hori zon of manufacturing and that simultaneously includes the whole horizon of sexuality. Whether we discuss the liberation of produc tive forces, of energies, or of speaking about sex, it is the same struggle and the same advancement toward an ever more powerful and differentiated socialization. One might as well say that repres sion in the maximal hypothesis, is never repression OF sex for the benefits of who knows what, but repression THROUGH sex (a grid of discourses, bodies, energies, and institutions imposed through sex, in the name of "the talking sex") . And sex which has been repressed only hides that repression by means of sex. 3 6 / Forget Foucault The production channel leads from work to sex, but only by switching tracks; as we move from political to "libidinal" economy (the last acquisition of '68), we change from a violent and archaic model of socialization (work) to a more subtle and fluid model which is at once more "psychic" and more in touch with the body (the sexual and the libidinal) . There is a metamorphosis and a veering away from labor power to drive (pulsion) , a veering away from a model founded on a system of representations (the famous "ideology") to a model operating on a system of affect (sex being only a kind of anamorphosis of the categorical social imperative) . From one discourse to the other-since it really is a question of discourse-there runs the same ultimatum of pro-duction in the literal sense of the word. The original sense of "production" is not in fact that of material manufacture; rather, it means to render visible, to cause to appear and be made to appear: pro-ducere. Sex is produced as one produces a document, or as an actor is said to appear (se produire) on stage. To produce is to force what belongs to another order (that of secrecy and seduction) to materialize. Seduction is that which is everywhere and always opposed to pro duction; seduction withdraws something from the visible order and so runs counter to production, whose project is to set every thing up in clear view, whether it be an object, a number, or a concept. Let everything be produced, be read, become real, visible, and marked with the sign of effectiveness; let everything be tran scribed into force relations, into conceptual systems or into calculable energy; let everything be said, gathered, indexed and registered: this is how sex appears in pornography, but this is more generally the proj ect of our whole culture, whose natural condi tion is "obscenity. " Ours is a culture of "monstration" and demonstration, of "productive" monstrosity (the "confession" so Jean Baudrillard / 37 well analyzed by Foucault is one of its forms) . We never find any seduction there-nor in pornography with its immediate produc tion of sexual acts in a frenzied activation of pleasure; we find no seduction in those bodies penetrated by a gaze literally absorbed by the suction of the transparent void. Not a shadow of seduction can be detected in the universe of production, ruled by the trans parency principle governing all forces in the order of visible and calculable phenomena: objects, machines, sexual acts, or gross national product.5 Pornography is only the paradoxical limit of the sexual, a real istic exacerbation and a mad obsession with the real-this is the "obscene," etymologically speaking and in all senses. But isn't the sexual itself a forced materialization, and isn't the coming of sexu ality already part of the Western notion of what is real-the obsession peculiar to our culture with "instancing" and instru mentalizing all things? Just as it is absurd to separate in other cultures the religious, the economic, the political, the juridical, and even the social and other phantasmagorical categories, for the reason that they do not occur there, and because these concepts are like so many venereal diseases with which we infect them in order to "understand" them better, so it is also absurd to give autonomy to the sexual as "instance" and as an irreducible given to which all other "givens" can be reduced. We need to do a cri tique of sexual Reason, or rather a genealogy of sexual Reason, as Nietzsche has done a genealogy of Morals-because this is our new moral system. One could say of sexuality as of death: "It is a habit to which consciousness has not long been accustomed." We do not understand, or we vaguely sympathize with, those cultures for which the sexual act has no finality in itself and for which sexuality does not have the deadly seriousness of an energy 38 / Forget Foucault to be freed, a forced ejaculation, a production at all cost, or of a hygienic reckoning of the body. These are cultures which main tain long processes of seduction and sensuousness in which sexuality is one service among others, a long procedure of gifts and counter-gifts; lovemaking is only the eventual outcome of this reciprocity measured to the rhythm of an ineluctable ritual. For us, this no longer has any meaning: for us, the sexual has become strictly the actualization ofa desire in a moment ofpleasure all the rest is "literature." What an extraordinary crystallization of the orgastic function, which is itself the materialization of an energetic substance. Ours is a culture of premature ejaculation. More and more, all seduction, all manner of seduction (which is itself a highly ritual ized process) , disappears behind the naturalized sexual imperative calling for the immediate realization of a desire. Our center of gravity has in fact shifted toward an unconscious and libidinal economy which only leaves room for the total naturalization of a desire bound either to fateful drives or to pure and simple mechan ical operation, but above all to the imaginary order of repression and liberation. Nowadays, one no longer says: "You've got a soul and you must save it," but: "You've got a sexual nature, and you must find out how to use it well." "You've got an unconscious, and you must learn how to liberate it." "You've got a body, and you must know how to enjoy it. " "You've got a libido, and you must know how to spend it," etc. , etc. This compulsion toward liquidity, flow, and an accelerated circulation of what is psychic, sexual, or pertaining to the body is the exact replica of the force which rules market value: capital must Jean Baudrillard / 39 circulate; gravity and any fixed point must disappear; the chain of investments and reinvestments must never stop; value must radiate endlessly and in every direction. This is the form itself which the current realization of value takes. It is the form of capital, and sexuality as a catchword and a model is the way it appears at the level of bodies. Besides, the body to which we constantly refer has no other reality than that of the sexual and productive model. It is capital which gives birth iri the same movement to the energetic of labor power and to the body we dream of today as the locus of desire and the unconscious. This is the body which serves as a sanctuary for psychic energy and drives and which, dominated by these drives and haunted by primary processes, has itself become primary process-and thus an anti-body, the ultimate revolutionary refer ent. Both are simultaneously conceived in repression, and their apparent antagonism is yet another effect of repression. Thus, to rediscover in the secret of bodies an unbound "libidinal" energy which would be opposed to the bound energy of productive bodies, and to rediscover a phantasmal and instinctual truth of the body in desire, is still only to unearth the psychic metaphor of capital. This is the nature of desire and of the unconscious: the trash heap of political economy and the psychic metaphor of capital. And sexual jurisdiction is the ideal means, in a fantastic extension of the j urisdiction governing private property, for assigning to each individual the management of a certain capital: psychic capital, libidinal capital, sexual capital, unconscious capital. And each individual will be accountable to himself for his capital, under the sign of his own liberation. This is what Foucault tells us (in spite of himself) : nothing functions with repression (repression) , everything functions with 40 / Fornet Foucault production ; nothing functions with repression (refoulement) , everything functions with liberation. But it is the same thing. Any form of liberation is fomented by repression: the liberation of productive forces is like that of desire; the liberation of bodies is like that of women's liberation, etc. There is no exception to the logic of liberation: any force or any liberated form of speech constitutes one more turn in the spiral of power. This is how "sexual liberation" accomplishes a miracle by uniting in the same revolutionary ideal the two maj or effects of repression, liberation and sexuality. Historically, this process has been building up for at least two centuries, but today it is in full bloom with the blessing of psy choanalysis-j ust as political economy and production have only made great strides with Marx's sanction and blessing. It is this con jecture which dominates us completely today, even through the "radical" contestation of Marx and psychoanalysis.* It is in this way that the purified axioms of Marxism and psychoanalysis converge in today)s only "revolutionary" catch word-that of the "productivity" of "desire." The "desiring machine" only fulfills, in one single movement, the positive destiny * Because it is a partial critique, the political critique of Marx against the bureau cratic perversion of the revolution by revolutionary parties and against the economistic infrastructural perversion of the class struggle, etc., amounts to gen eralizing the axiomatic of production (productivity regarded as a discourse of total reference) . This is Marxism's assumption in its purest form. Likewise, because it is only partial, the oedipal critique of psychoanalysis (Deleuze, etc.) against the perversion of desire by the signifier, the law, castra tion, and the oedipal model only glorifies the axiomatic of desire and of the unconscious in its purest form. Joan Baudril!ard I 4 1 of Marxism and psychoanalysis . They at last come together under less naIve auspices than Reich's, still too strongly marked by the Oedipus complex, the proletariat, repression, and class struggle. Reich had aimed too soon at the synthesis of two disciplines that were both historical and psychological and that were still cluttered with cumbersome elements: his mixture is archaic and his inter pretation does not hold up; the times were not yet ready. But today, on the basis of a productivity cleansed of its contradictions, its historical objectives and its determinations and of a libido cleansed in its own way (of the Oedipus complex, repression, and of its too-genital, too familial, determinations) the collusion and synthesis may finally be accomplished to each other's benefit: the mirror of production and that of desire will be able to refract each other endlessly. The category of the sexual and sexual discourse were born in the same way that the category of the clinical and the clin ical gaze came into being-where there was nothing before except uncontrolled, senseless, unstable, or highly ritualized forms. And where there was therefore no repression either, that leitmotiv by which we evaluate all earlier societies much more so than ours; we condemn them for being primitive from the technological point of view; these were repressed, non-"liberated" societies which did not even know of the unconscious. Psychoanalysis came to clear the way for sex by telling what was hidden-how incredible is the racism of truth, the evangelical racism of psychoanalysis; every thing changes with the coming of the Word. If the question remains unsettled for our culture (repression or not) , it is nonethe less without ambiguity for the others: they know neither repression nor the unconscious because they do not know the category of the sexual. U7e act as if the sexual were "repressed" wherever it does not appear in its own right: this is our way of saving sex through the 42 / Foroet Foucaul t,.... "sex principle. " It is our moral system (psychic and psychoanalytic) which remains hidden behind the hypothesis of repression and which governs our blindness. To talk about sexuality, "repressed" or not, "sublimated" or not, in feudal, rural, and primitive soci eties is a sign of utter foolishness (like reinterpreting religion, ne varietur, as ideology and mystification) . And on that basis, then, it becomes possible again to say with Foucault: there is not and there has never been any repression in our culture either-not, how ever, according to his meaning, but in the sense that there has never truly been any sexuality. Sexuality, like political economy, is only montage (all of whose twists and turns Foucault analyzes); sexuality as we hear about it and as it "is spoken, " even as the "id speaks," is only a simulacrum which experience has forever crossed up, baffled, and surpassed, as in any system. The coherence and transparence of homo sexualis has never had more reality than that of homo oeconomicus. A long process simultaneously establishes the psychic, the sex ual, and also the "other scene" of fantasy and the unconscious, as well as the energy to be produced there. Such psychic energy is but a direct effect of the "scenic" hallucination of repression through which energy is hallucinated as sexual substance; it will then become metaphorized and metonymized according to the various topical, economical, etc. , instances and according to modalities of secondary, tertiary, etc. , repression: what a marvelous edifice on the part of psychoanalysis, the loveliest hallucination of the world unseen, as Nietzsche would say. What an extraordinary effective ness this model of energetic and scenic simulation possesses; what an extraordinary theoretical psychodrama is presented in this mise-en-scene of the 'psyche, this scenario of sex as an instance, as an eternal reality (as elsewhere others have hypostatized production Joan Baudri l !ard / 43 into a generic dimension or driving energy) . What does it matter whether the economic, the biological, or the psychic bears the cost of this mise-en-scene-or whether we refer to the "scene" or to the "other scene"-it is the scenario that counts, it is psychoanalysis in its entirety as a model of simulation which must be questioned. In this production-at-all-costs that is the modern sacrament of sex, there is such terrorism in the project of liquidation that one does not see why, unless it's for the beauty of the paradox, anyone would refuse to see repression there. Or could it be because this is too weak? Foucault doesn't want to talk about repression: but what else is that slow, brutal infection of the mind through sex, whose only equivalent in the past was infection through the soul (see Nietzsche-the infection through sex is nothing anyway but the historical and mental reversal of the infection through the soul under the sign of materialist parousia!) But it is really useless to argue about the terms. One can say either way: speaking is the primary injunction and repression only a detour (in this sense, labor and exploitation are also only a detour and the alibi for something else more fundamental: no argument here) , or repression comes first and speech is only a more modern variant of it ("repressive desublimation") . Basically, both hypotheses don't change much of anything. What is disturbing in the first hypothesis (Foucault's) is that if there has been repres sion somewhere, or at least the effect of repression (and this can hardly be denied) , then there is no way to explain it. Why is the imaginary of repression necessary for the balance of powers, if these live on the induction, production, and extortion of speech? On the other hand, one sees better why speech (a metastable system) would come after repression, which is only an unstable power system. 44 / Forget Foucault If sex exists solely when it is spoken and discoursed about and when it is confessed, what was there before we spoke about it? What break establishes this discourse on sex, and in relationship to what? We see what new powers are organized around it, but what peripeteia of power instigates it? What does it neutralize, or settle, or put to an end* (otherwise who can ever pretend to end it, as Foucault states on p. 1 57, "to break away from the agency of sex"6) ? Wherever we turn, it is not an innocent undertaking to "give meaning to sex"; power starts off from something (otherwise there would not even be those resistances noted on p. 96), something like an exclusion, a division, or a denial, and on that basis power can "produce something real" or produce the real. It is only from this point on that we can conceive of a new peripeteia of power-a catastrophic one this time-where power no longer succeeds in producing the real, in reproducing itself as real, or in opening new spaces to the reality principle, and where it falls into the hyperreal and vanishes: this is the end ofpower, the end of the strategy of the real. *According to Foucault, this break puts an end to "the body and its pleasure," the innocence of libertinage, and the ars erotica (of which we still retain a few terms, such as seduction, charm, sensuality, jouissance, "pleasure" itself-we no longer dare talk about voluptuousness-terms which sex and psychoanalysis have succeeded neither in annexing nor in discrediting with their discourse) . I think it puts an end to something more radical, a configuration where not only sex and desire but even the body and pleasure are not specified as such, just as the discourse of production puts an end to a regime where not only exchange value but also use value do not exist. Use value is the ultimate alibi, in sex as well as in production. And I'm afraid that in Foucault "pleasures" are still opposed to the "exchange value of the sexual" only insofar as they constitute the use value of the body. Jean Baudril!ard I 45 For Foucault, the crisis or peripeteia of power does not even exist; there is only modulation, capillarity, a "micro-physical" seg mentation of power as Deleuze says. And this is true: for Foucault, power operates right away like Monod's genetic code, according to a diagram of dispersion and command (DNA) , and according to a teleonomical order. Down with theological power, long live teleo nomical power! Teleonomy is the end of all final determination and of all dialectic: it is the kind of generative inscription of the code that one expects-an immanent, ineluctable, and always pos itive inscription that yields only to infinitesimal mutations. If we look closely, power according to Foucault strangely resembles "this conception of social space which is as new as the recent concep tion of physical and mathematical spaces," as Deleuze says now that he has suddenly been blinded by the benefits of science. It is precisely this collusion that we must denounce, or laugh about. Everyone today wallows in the molecular as they do in the revolu tionary. However, until further notice-and this could be the only one-the true molecule is not that of the revolutionaries; it is Monod's molecule of the genetic code and the "complex spirals of DNA. " We should not, however, rediscover as an apparatus (dis- positif) of desire what the cyberneticists have described as a matrix of code and of control? We see what benefit there is over the old finalist, dialectical, or repressive theories in supposing a total positivity, a teleonomy and a microphysics of power, but we must also see what we are getting into: a strange complicity with cybernetics which challenge pre cisely the same earlier schemas (Foucault does not, for that matter, hide his affinity with Jacob, Monod, and recently Jacques Ruffle, De la Biofogie a fa Culture [Paris: Flammarion, 1 976] ) . The same can be said of Deleuze's molecular topology of desire, whose flows 46 / Forget Foucault and connections wJll soon converge if they have not already done so with genetic simulations, micro cellular drifts, and the random facilitations (ftayages) of code manipulators. In the Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature (University of Minnesota Press, 1 986) of Deleuze-Guattari, the transcendental Law such as it is found in The Castle is opposed to the immanence of desire in the adjacent offices. How can we fail to see that the Law of the Castle has its "rhizomes" in the corridors and the offices-the "bar" or the break constituted by the law has simply been geared down ad infinitum in cellular and molecular succession. Desire is therefore only the molecular version of the Law. And what a strange coincidence to find schemas of desire and schemas of control everywhere. It is a spiral of power, of desire, and of the molecule which is now bringing us openly toward the final peripeteia of absolute control. Beware of the molecular! This "veering away" in Foucault's writing occurs progressively since Discipline and Punish, going against Madness and Civiliza tion and the whole original ordering of his genealogy. Why wouldn't sex, like madness, have gone through a confinement phase in which the terms of certain forms of reason and a domi nant moral system were fomented before sex and madness, according to the logic of exclusion, once more became discourses of reference? Sex once more becomes the catchword of a new moral system; madness becomes the paradoxical form of reason for a society too long haunted by its absence and dedicated this time to its (normalized) cult under the sign of its own liberation. Such is also the trajectory of sex in the curved space of discrimination and repression where a mise-en-scene is installed as a long-term strategy to produce sex later as a new rule of the game. Repression or the secret is the locus of an imaginary inscription on whose basis Jean Baudrillard / 47 madness or sex will subsequently become exchangeable as value. * Everywhere, as Foucault himself has so well demonstrated, dis crimination is the violent founding act of Reason-why wouldn't the same hold true of sexual reason? This time we are in a full universe, a space radiating with power but also cracked, like a shattered windshield still holding together. However, this "power" remains a mystery-starting from despotic centrality, it becomes by the halfway point a "multiplicity of force relations" (but what is a force relation without a force resultant? It's a bit like Pere Ubu's polyhedra that set off in all directions like crabs) and it culminates, at the extreme pole, with resistances (what a divine surprise on pp. 95-960 so small and so tenuous that, literally speaking, atoms of power and atoms of resistance merge at this microscopic level. The same fragment of gesture, body, gaze, and discourse encloses both the positive elec tricity of power and the negative electricity of resistance (and we wonder what the origin of that resistance might turn out to be; nothing in the book prepares us for it except the allusion to some inextricable "force relations." But since we may ask ourselves exactly the same question concerning power, a balance is achieved in a discourse which in essence staunchly describes the only true spiral, that of its own power) . This is not an objection. It is a good thing that terms lose their meaning at the limits of the text (they don't do it enough) .** Foucault makes the term sex and its true principle ("the fictive ", " * Sexual discourse is invented through repression, for repression speaks about sex better than any other form of discourse. Through repression (and only through repression) , sex takes on reality and intensity because only confinement gives it the stature of myth. Its liberation is the beginning of its end. 48 / rorget Foucault point of sex") lose their meaning; the analytics of power is not pushed to its conclusion at the point where power cancels itself out or where it has never been. As economic reference loses its strength, either the reference of desire or that of power becomes preponderant. The reference of desire, born in psychoanalysis, comes to maturity in Deleuzian anti-psychoanalysis under the form of a shattered molecular desire. The reference of power, which has a long history, is discussed again today by Foucault at the level of dispersed, interstitial power as a grid of bodies and of the ramiform pattern of controls. Foucault at least economizes desire, as well as history (but being very pru dent, he does not deny them) , yet everything still comes back to some kind of power-without having that notion reduced and expurgated-just as with Deleuze everything comes back to some kind of desire, or with Lyorard to some kind of intensity: these are shattered notions, yet they remain miraculously intact in their current acceptance. Desire and intensity remain force/notions; with Foucault power remains, despite being pulverized, a structural and a polar notion with a perfect genealogy and an inexplicable presence, a notion which cannot be surpassed in spite of a sort of latent denunciation, a notion which is whole in each of its points or microscopic dots. It is hard to see how it could be reversed (we find the same aporia in Deleuze, where desire's reversion into its own repression is inexplicable) . Power no longer has a coup de ** This is what a theory should be at best, rather than a statement of some truth, or above all a "breaking away from the agency of sex" this is wishful thinking; and besides, if there is no repression, what does this emancipation mean? But we can bet that a new militant generation will rise over this horizon, brandishing " d f h "new proce ures 0 trut . \.Joan Baudri!!ard / 49 force- there is simply nothing else either on this side of it or beyond it (the passage from the "molar" or the "molecular" is for Deleuze still a revolution of desire, but for Foucault it is an anamorphosis of power) . Only now Foucault does not see that power is dying (even infinitesimal power) , that it is not j ust pul verized by pulverulent, that it is undermined by a reversal and tormented by a reversibility and a death which cannot appear in the genealogical process alone. With Foucault, we always brush against political determina tion in its last instance. One form dominates and is diffracted into the models characteristic of the prison, the military, the asylum, and disciplinary action. This form is no longer rooted in ordinary relations of production (these, on the contrary are modeled after it) ; this form seems to find its procedural system within itself and this represents enormous progress over the illusion of establishing power in a substance of production or of desire. Fou cault unmasks all the final or causal illusions concerning power, but he does not tell us anything concerning the simulacrum of power itself. Power is an irreversible principle of organization because it fabricates the real (always more and more of the real) , effecting a quadrature, nomenclature, and dictature without appeal; nowhere does it cancel itself out, become entangled in itself, or mingle with death. In this sense, even if it has no finality and no last judgment, power returns to its own identity again as a final principle: it is the last term, the irreducible web, the last tale that can be told; it is what structures the indeterminate equation of the word. According to Foucault, this is the come-on that power offers, and it is not simply a discursive trap. What Foucault does not see is that power is never there and that its institution, like the institution 50 / Forget Foucault of spatial perspective vers us "real" space in the Renaissance, is only a simulation of pe rspective- it is no more reality than eco nomic accumulation-and what a tremendous trap that is. Whether of time, value, the subject, etc., the axiom and the myth of a real or possible accumulation govern us everywhere, although we know that nothing is ever amassed and that stockpiles are self consuming, like modern megalopolis, or like overloaded memories. Any attempt at accumulation is ruined in advance by the void.* Something in us disaccumulates unto death, undoes, destroys, liquidates, and disconnects so that we can resist the pressure of the real, and live. Something at the bottom of the whole system of production resists the infinite expansion ofproduction-other wise, we would all be already buried. There is something in power that resists as well, and we see no difference here between those who enforce it and those who submit to it: this distinction has become meaningless, not because the roles are interchangeable but because power is in its form reversible, because on one side and the other something holds out against the unilateral exercise and the infinite expansion of power, j ust as elsewhere against the infinite expansion of production. This resistance is not a "desire" it is what causes power to come undone in exact proportion to its logical and irreversible extension. And it's taking place every where today. In fact, the whole analysis of power needs to be reconsidered. To have power or not, to take it or lose it, to incarnate it or to challenge it: if this were power, it would not even exist. Foucault *It is this impossible accumulation which entails the equal impossibility of repression, for repression is only the inverse figure of accumulation-from the other side of the "bar. " Joan Baudrillard / 5 1 tells us something else; power is something that functions; " . . . power is not an institution, and not a structure; neither is it a certain strength we are endowed with; it is the name that one attributes to a complex strategical situation in a particular society" ( The History of Sexuality, p. 93). Neither central, nor unilateral, nor dominant, power is distributional; like a vector, it operates through relays and transmissions. Because it is an immanent, unlimited field of forces, we still do not understand what power runs into and against what it stumbles since it is expansion, pure magnetization. However, if power were this magnetic infiltration ad infinitum of the social field, it would long ago have ceased meeting with any resistance. Inversely, if it were the one-sidedness of an act of submission, as in the traditional "optic," it would long ago have been overthrown everywhere. It would have collapsed under the pressure of antagonistic forces. Yet this has never hap pened, apart from a few "historical" exceptions. For "materialist" thinking, this can only appear to be an internally insoluble prob lem: why don't "dominated" masses immediately overthrow power? Why fascism? Against this unilateral theory (but we under stand why it survives, particularly among "revolutionaries" -they would really like power for themselves) , against this native vision, but also against Foucault's functional vision in terms of relays and transmissions, we must say that power is something that is exchanged. Not in the economical sense, but in the sense that power is executed according to a reversible cycle of seduction, challenge, and ruse (neither axis nor indefinite relay, but a cycle) . And if power cannot be exchanged in this sense, it simply disap pears. We must say that power seduces, but not in the vulgar sense of a complicit form of desire on the part of those who are domi nated-this comes down to basing it in the desire of others, 52 / Forget Foucault which is really going overboard in taking people for idiots-no, power seduces by that reversibility which haunts it, and upon which a minimal symbolic cycle is set up. Dominators and domi nated exist no more than victims and executioners. (While exploiters and exploited do in fact exist, they are on different sides because there is no reversibility in production, which is precisely the point: nothing essential happens at that level.) With power there are no antagonistic positions: it is carried out according to a cycle of seduction. The one-sidedness of a force relation never exists, a one-sided ness upon which a power "structure" might be established, or a form of "reality" for power and its perpetual movement, which is linear and final in the traditional vision but radiating and spiraling in Fou cault. Unilateral or segmentary: this is the dream of power imposed on us by reason. But nothing yearns to be that way; everything seeks its own death, including power. Or rather-but this is the same thing-everything wants to be exchanged, reversed, or abolished in a cycle (this is in fact why neither repression nor the unconscious exists: reversibility is always already there) . That alone is what seduces deep down, and that alone constitutes pure jouissance, while power only satisfies a particular form of hegemonic logic belonging to reason. Seduction is elsewhere. Seduction is stronger than power because it is a reversible and mortal process, while power wants to be irreversible like value, as well as cumulative and immortal like value. Power shares all the illusions of the real and of production; it wants to belong to the order of the real and so falls over into the imaginary and into self superstition (helped by theories which analyze it even if only to challenge it) . Seduction, however, does not partake of the real order. It never belongs to the order of force or to force relations. Jean Baudri l lard / 53 It is precisely for this reason that seduction envelops the whole real process of power, as well as the whole real order of production, with this never-ending reversibility and disaccumulation-without which neither power nor production would even exist. Behind power, or at the very heart of power and of produc tion, there is a void which gives them today a last glimmer of reality. Without that which reverses them, cancels them, and seduces them, they would never have attained reality. Besides, the real has never interested anyone. It is the locus of disenchantment par excellence, the locus of simulacrum of accu mulation against death. Nothing could be worse. It is the imaginary catastrophe standing behind them that sometimes makes reality and the truth fascinating. Do you think that power, economy, sex-all the reals big numbers-would have stood up one single instant without a fascination to support them which originates precisely in the inversed mirror where they are reflected and continually reversed, and where their imaginary catastrophe generates a tangible and immanent gratification? Today especially, the real is no more than a stockpile of dead matter, dead bodies, and dead language. It still makes us feel secure today to evaluate this stock of what is real (let's not talk about energy: the ecological complaint hides the fact that it is not material energy which is disappearing on the species' horizon but the energy of the real, the reality of the real and of every serious possibility, capitalistic or revolutionary, of managing the real) . If the horizon of production has vanished, then the horizon of speech, sexuality, or desire can still carry on; there will always be something to liberate, to enjoy, and to exchange with others through words: now that's real, that's substantial, that's prospective stock. That's power. 54 / Forgot Foucault Not so, unfortunately. Not for long, that is. This sort of thing consumes itself as it goes along. We have made, and have wanted to make, an irreversible agency (instance) out of both sex and power; and out of desire we have made a force or irreversible ener gy (a stock of energy, needless to say, since desire is never far from capital) . For we give meaning, following our use of the imaginary, only to what is irreversible; accumulation, progress, growth, pro duction, value, power, and desire itself are all irreversible processes-inject the slightest dose of reversibility into our eco nomical, political, institutional, or sexual machinery ( dispositif) and everything collapses at once. This is what endows sexuality today with this mythic authority over bodies and hearts. But it is also what makes it fragile, like the whole structure of production. Seduction is stronger than production. It is stronger than sex uality and must never be confused with it. It is not an internal process of sexuality, although it is generally reduced to that. It is a circular and reversible process of challenge, one-upmanship, and death. The sexual, on the contrary, is the form of seduction that has been reduced and restricted to the energetic terms of desire. What we need to analyze is the intrication of the process of seduction with the process of production and power and the irrup tion of a minimum of reversibility in every irreversible process, secretly ruining and dismantling it while simultaneously insuring that minimal continuum of pleasure moving across it and without which it would be nothing. And we must keep in mind that pro duction everywhere and always seeks to exterminate seduction in order to establish itself over the single economy governing force relations; we must also keep in mind that sex or its production seeks everywhere to exterminate seduction in order to establish itself over the single economy governing relations of desire. Jean Baudrillard / 55 When Jesus arose from the dead, he became a Zombie. - Graffito, Watts, Los Angeles The Messiah wi/l only come when he will no longer be necessary. He will come one day after his advent. He will not come on the day of the Last Judgment, but on the day after. - Kafka TH U S WI LL TH EY AWAIT TH E M ESSIAH , not only on the day after, but on all the following days, even though he was already there. Or in other words: God was already dead long before they knew it, just as light-years separate the same event from one star to the next, thereby separating advent from event. Thus will they always be one Revolution late. Or rather: they will await the Revolution to the very day, even though it has already been accomplished. And when it happens, it will be because it is no longer necessary; it will be nothing more than the sign of what has already occurred. Are the Messiah and the Revolution so insignificant that they must always arrive late, like a projected shadow or a reality effect 57 after the fact, whereas things have never needed the Messiah or a Revolution in order to take place? But in the end the Revolution signifies only this: that it has already taken place and that it had a meaning just before, one day before, but not anymore now. When it comes, it is to hide the fact that it is no longer meaningful. In fact, the revolution has already taken place. Neither the bourgeois revolution nor the communist revolution: just the revolution. This means that an entire cycle is ending, and they have not noticed it. And they will play the game of linear revo lution, whereas it has already curved upon itself to produce its simulacrum, like stucco angels whose extremities j oin in a curved mirror. All things come to an end in their redoubled simulation-a sign that a cycle is completed. When the reality effect, like the use less day-after Messiah, starts uselessly duplicating the course of things, it is the sign that a cycle is ending in an interplay of simu lacra where everything is replayed before death, at which point everything falls over far behind the horizon of truth. It is useless therefore to run after power or to discourse about it ad infinitum since from now on it also partakes of the sacred horizon of appearances and is also there only to hide the fact that it no longer exists, or rather to indicate that since the apogee of the political has been crossed, the other side of the cycle is now starting in which power reverts into its own simulacrum. Power is no more held than a secret is extracted, for the secrecy of power is the same as that of the secret: it does not exist. On the other side of the cycle-the side of the decline of the real-only the mise-en-scene of the secret, or of power, is opera tional. But this is the sign that the substance of power, after a 58 / Forget Foucault ceaseless expansion of several centuries, is brutally exploding and that the sphere of power is in the process of contracting from a star of first magnitude to a red dwarf, and then to a black hole absorbing all the substance of the real and all the surrounding energies, now transmuted at once into a single pure sign-the sign of the social whose density crushes us. N E ITH E R AN AG E N CY (instance) , a structure, a substance, nor in fact a force relation, power is a challenge. From the power puppet of primitive societies which talks but has nothing to say to the current form of power which is there only to exorcise the absence of power, a whole cycle has been covered which is one of a double challenge, the challenge of power against all of society and the challenge against those who hold power. This is the secret history both of power and its catastrophe. Let us consider the real history of capital. All materialist crit ical thought is only the attempt to stop capital, to freeze it in the moment of its economic and political rationality. Capital's "mirror phase," lulled by the sirens of dialectics. Of course at this point materialist thinking also freezes everything that resists it at this one phase. Fortunately, capital does not remain trapped in this model but goes beyond it in its irrational movement to leave standing there an example of materialist thought curled back upon its nostalgic dialectics and its already lost idea of the revolution. Such thought was in essence only a rather superficial moment of theory, but above all it operated like a brake in attempting to neu tralize, with a well-tempered socialite and an ideal social / transparence, the deep rooted opposition and deadly challenge to the social itself. I.Joan Baudri!lard / 5 9 Today the extremes finally come face to face, once the conserv ative obstacle of critical thought has been removed. Not only do social forces clash (however dominated by one single great model of socialization) , butforms come into opposition as well-the forms of capital and of sacrifice, of value and of challenge-with the death of the social at stake. The social itself must be considered a model of simulation and a form to be overthrown since it is a strategic form of value brutally positioned by capital and then idealized by critical thought. And we still do not know what it is that forever has fought against it and that irresistibly destroys it today. All forms of power have endeavored to camouflage this fun damental challenge in the form of force relations such as dominator/ dominated and exploiter/exploited, thereby channeling all resistance into a frontal relation (even reduced to microstrategies, this conception still dominates in Foucault: the puzzle of guerilla warfare has simply been substituted for the chessboard of classical battle) . For in terms of force relations, power always wins, even if it changes hands as revolutions come and go. But it is doubtful if anyone has ever thought it possible to exorcise power by force. Rather, each person knows deep down that any form of power is a personal challenge, a challenge to the death, and one that can only be answered by a counterchallenge to break the logic of power or, even better, to enclose it in a circular logic. Such is the nature of this counterchallenge-nonpolitical, nondialectical, and nonstrategic-but whose strength throughout history has nonetheless been incalculable: this is the challenge which dares those who hold power to exercise it to the limit and which can only spell death for those who are dominated. A chal lenge to power to be power, power of the sort that is total, irreversible, without scruple, and with no limit to its violence. No 60 / Forget Foucau lt form of power dares go that far (to the point where in any case it too would be destroyed) . And so it is in facing this unanswerable challenge that power starts to break up. There was a time when power allowed itself to be sacrificed according to the rules of this symbolic game from which it cannot escape. A time when power possessed the ephemeral and mortal quality of what had to be sacrificed. Ever since it has sought to escape that rule, or has ceased being a symbolic power in order to become a political power and a strategy of social domination, the symbolic challenge has not stopped haunting power in the politi cal sense, nor has it stopped undoing the truth of the political. Now that it has been struck by that challenge, the entire substance of the political is crumbling. We are at the point where no one exercises power or wants it anymore, not because of some histori cal or temperamental weakness but because its secret has been lost, and no one wants to take up the challenge any longer. How true it is, then, that power need only be enclosed within power for it to burst. Against that "strategy" which is not a strategy, power has defended itself in every possible way (this is exactly what consti tutes its practice) : by being democratized, liberalized, vulgarized, and, more recently, decentralized and deterritorialized, etc. But whereas force relations become easily trapped and de-energized by these tricks of the political, the reverse challenge, with its ineluctable simplicity, comes to an end only with power. P EO P LE ALWAYS R EASO N in terms of strategies and force rela tions; they don't see the desperate effort of the oppressed to escape oppression or uproot power. They never measure the extraordinary I.Joan Baudri l lard / 6 1 force of the challenge because this challenge is unremitting and invisible (although that force can manifest itself in large-scale acts, but acts "without objective, without duration, and without future") . The challenge is hopeless-but then hope is a weak value, and his tory itself is a value degraded through time and distorted between its end and its means. All the stakes of history are eluctable, nego tiable, and dialectic. Challenge is the opposite of dialogue : it creates a nondialectic, ineluctable space. It is neither a means nor an end: it opposes its own space to political space. It knows neither middle range nor long-term; its only term is the immediacy of a response or of death. Everything linear, including history, has an end; challenge alone is without end since it is indefinitely reversible. And it is this reversibility which gi es it its prodigious force. * No one has ever seriously considered this other, nonpolitical side of power, the side of its symbolic reversal. However, because it lacks definition by the void, this oppositional challenge has always been at stake and has overcome in the end power's political definition as central, legislative, or police power. It is also involved at the current stage, where power only appears as a sort of curvature * This is no doubt the same reversibility which the category of the feminine has exerted on the masculine throughout the entire course of our culture's sexual his tory: thus the challenge which the feminine offers the masculine of taking its pleasure (jouissance) alone, and of alone exercising the right to pleasure and sex. Women's right to reserve sex and to deny pleasure, their constant reversals, and their continuous refraction of sexual power into the void have always exerted an incalculable pressure, with no possibility of response from the "strong" mascu line side except through a headlong flight into phallocracy. Today phallocracy is crumbling under this very challenge, taking with it all forms of traditional sexu ality-and not at all due to social pressure from any sort of feminine liberation. 62 / Forget Foucault of social space, or the summation of scattered particles, or the branching out of random elements "in cluster" (any term from microphysics or computer theory can be transferred today into power, as well as into desire) . This is a stage of power, d la Fou cault, the conductor, inductor, and strategist of speech. But the turnaround Foucault manages from power's repressive centrality to its shifting positivity is only a peripeteia. We stay effectively with in political discourse-"we never get out of it," says Foucault -although we need precisely to grasp the radical lack of defini tion in the notion of the political, its lack of existence, its simulation, and what from that point on sends the mirror of the void back to power. In effect, we need a symbolic violence more powerful than any political violence. Let us consider now the real history of class struggle whose only moments were those when the dominated class fought on the basis of its self-denial "as such," on the basis of the sole fact that it amounted to nothing. Marx had told it that it should be abolished one day, but this was still a political perspective. When the class itself, or a fraction of it, prefers to act as a radical non-class, or as the lack of existenc  of a class, i.e., to act out its own death right away within the explosive structure of capital, when it chooses to implode suddenly instead of seeking political expansion and class hegemony, then the result is June '48, the Commune, or May '68 . The secret of the void lies here, in the incalculable force of the implosion (contrary to our imaginary concept of revolutionary explosion)-think of the Latin Quarter on the afternoon of May 3. Power did not always consider itself as power, and the secret of the great politicians was to know that power does not exist. To know that it is only a perspectival space of simulation, as was the pictorial Renaissance, and that if power seduces, it is precisely- Jean Baudri l l ard / 63 what the naive realists of politics will never understand-because it is simulacrum and because it undergoes a metamorphosis into signs and is invented on the basis of signs. (This is why parody, the reversal of signs or their hyperextension, can touch power more deeply than any force relation.) This secret of power's lack of exis tence that the great politicians shared also belongs to the great bankers, who know that money is nothing, that money does not exist; and it also belonged to the great theologians and inquisitors who knew that God does not exist, that God is dead. This gives them incredible superiority. Power is truly sovereign when it grasps this secret and confronts itself with that very challenge. When it ceases to do so and pretends to find a truth, a substance, or a representation (in the will of the people, etc.) , then it loses its sovereignty, allowing others to hurl back the challenge of its own life or death, until it dies in at the hands of that infatuation with itself, that imaginary concept of itself, and that superstitious belief in itself as a substance; it dies as well when it fails to recognize (meconnaissance) itself as a void, or as something reversible in death. At one time leaders were killed when they lost that secret. W H E N O N E TALKS SO M UC H about power, it's because it can no longer be found anywhere. The same goes for God: the stage in which he was everywhere came just before the one in which he was dead. Even the death of God no doubt came before the stage in which he was everywhere. The same goes for power, and if one speaks about it so much and so well, that's because it is deceased, a ghost, a puppet; such is also the meaning of Kafka's words: the Messiah of the day after is only a God resuscitated from among the dead, a zombie. The finesse and the microscopic nature of the analysis 64 / Forget Foucault are themselves a "nostalgia effect. " And so everywhere we see power coupled with seduction (it's almost obligatory these days) in order to give it a second existence. Power gets its fresh blood from desire. And it's no longer anything more than a sort of "desire effect" at the confines of the social, or a sort of "strategy effect" at the confines of history. It is here also that "the" powers of Foucault come into play: grafted upon the privacy of bodies, the tracing of discourses, the facilitation of gestures, in a more insinuating, more subtle, and more discursive strategy which there too takes away power from history and brings it nearer to seduction. This universal fascination with power in its exercise and its theory is so intense because it is a fascination with a dead power characterized by a simultaneous "resurrection effect, " in an obscene and parodic mode, of all the forms of power already seen-exactly like sex in pornography. The imminence of the death of all the great referents (religious, sexual, political, etc.) is expressed by exacerbating the forms of violence and representation that characterized them. There is no doubt that fascism, for exam ple, is the first obscene and pornographic form of a desperate "revival" of political power. As the violent reactivation of a form of power that despairs of its rational foundations (the form of repre sentation that was emptied of its meaning during the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries) , as the violent reactivation of the social in a society that despairs of its own rational and con tractual foundation, fascism is nevertheless the only fascinating modern form of power: it is the only one since Machiavelli to assert itself as such, as a challenge, by trifling with all forms of political "truth" and it is the only one to have taken up the chal lenge to assume power unto death (whether its own or that of others) . Besides, it is because it has taken up the challenge that Jean Baudri llard / 65 fascism has benefited from this strange consent, this absence of resis tance to power. Why have all the symbolic resistances failed in the face of fascism-a unique fact in history? No ideological mystification and no sexual repression a la Reich can explain it. Only challenge can arouse such a passion for responding to it, such a frenzied assent to play the game in return, and thus raise every resistance. This, moreover, remains a mystery: why does one respond to a challenge? For what reason does one accept to play better, and feel passionately compelled to answer such an arbitrary injunction? Fascist power is then the only form which was able to reenact the ritual prestige of death, but (and most importantly here) in an already posthumous and phony mode, a mode of one-upmanship and mise-en-scene, and in an aesthetic mode-as Benjamin clearly saw-that was no longer truly sacrificial. Fascism's politics is an aesthetics of death, one that already has the look of a nostalgia fad; and everything that has had this look since then must be inspired by fascism, understood as an already nostalgic obscenity and vio lence, as an already reactionary scenario of power and death which is already obsolete the very moment it appears in history. Again, an eternal shift in the advent of the Messiah, as Kafka says. An eternal inner simulation of power, which is never already (jamais deja) anything but the sign of what it was. We find the same nostalgia and the same simulation charac teristic of nostalgia fads when we look today at "micro" fascisms and "micro" powers. The "micro" operator can only downshift from what fascism may have been without resolving it and trans form an extremely complex scenario of simulation and death into a simplified "floating signifier," "whose essential function is denunciation" (Foucault) . Its function is also invocation because the memory of fascism (like the memory of power) , even in the 66 / For Jet Foucault micro form, is still the nostalgic invocation of the political, or of a form of truth for the political; and its invocation simultaneously allows us to save the hypothesis of desire, whose mere paranoiac accident power and fascism can always appear to be. IN ANY CASE, power lures us on and truth lures us on. Everything is in the lightning-quick contraction in which an entire cycle of accumulation, of power, or of truth comes to a close. There is never any inversion or any subversion: the cycle must be accom plished. But it can happen instantaneously. It is death that is at stake in this contraction. 1 . A rt Press 22 Ganuary-February, 1 976) : 3, [Translator's note] 2. Roland Barthes, The Empire of Signs, tr. Richard Howard, New York, Hill & Wang, ( 1 970) 1 982. 3. Gilles Deleuze, "Ecrivain Non: Un Nouveau Cartographe," Critique 3 1 ( 1 975) : 1 207-27. [Translator's note] 4. See Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophre nia, trans. R. Hurley, M. Seem, and H. Lane (New York, 1 977) and Jean-Francois Lyotard, Libidinal Economy, tr. I.LH. Grant, London, Athlone Press, ( 1 993) 1 992. 5. For a more complete account of Baudrillard's critique of production, see his Mirror ofProduction, trans . Mark Poster (St. Louis, 1 975) ; for a fuller discussion of production/seduction, see his recent Seduction, tr. Brian Singer, New York, St. Martiin's Press, ( 1 979) 1 990. [Translator's note] 6. Michel Foucault, History of Sexuality, 1: The Will to Knowledge (vol 1), tr. Robert Hurley, New York, Pantheon, ( 1 976) 1 9 80. 7. See Jacques Monod, Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy ofBiology, trans. Austryn Wainhouse (New York, 1 97 1 ) . [Translator's note] Jean Baudrlilard / 67 Part FORGET BAUDR I L LARD An Interview with Sylvere Lotringer "As in judo, the best answer to an adversary maneuver is not to retreat, but to go along with it, turning it to one's own advantage, as a resting point for the next phase." - Michel Foucault 1 The Ends of History 0 Hyperreality 0 Nihilism and Disenchant ment 0 Neutralizing Desire 0 Appearance and Disappearance 0 Sexuality and Obscenity 0 Foucault: Genealogy and Simulation 0 Desire and Seduction 0 Metaphor and Metamorphosis 0 The Disappearance of of the Subject 0 The Giddiness of Chance 0 Panic and Information Sylvere Lotringer: Let's begin at the end or, rather, at the ends: the end ofproduction, the end of history, the end of the political. Your reflections begin with a series ofliquidations. Has the time come to put western civilization in the wax museum? Is everything now for sale? Jean Baudrillard: I don't know if it's a question of an "end." The word is probably meaningless in any case, because we're no longer so sure that there is such a thing as linearity. I would prefer to begin, even if it sounds a little like science fiction, with a quotation from Die Provinz des Menschen (The Human Province) , a recent book by Elias Canetti.1 It is possible, he says-and he finds the idea rather painful-that starting from a precise moment in time the human race has dropped out of history. Without even being conscious 7 1 of the change, we suddenly left reality behind. What we have to do now, continues Canetti, would be to find that critical point, that blind spot in time. Otherwise, we j ust continue on with our self destructive ways. This hypothesis appeals to me because Canetti doesn't envisage an end, but rather what I would hall an "ecstasy, " in the primal sense of that word-a passage at the same time into the dissolution and the transcendence of a form. History survives its disappearance, but somewhere its spirit got snatched away . . . History isn't over, it is in a state of simulation, like a body that's kept in a state of hibernation. In this irreversible coma everything continues to function all the same, and eventually can even seem to amount to history. And then, surreptitiously (as Canetti has it) , it's possible that everything is no longer real or true. In any case we would no longer be in a position to decide on that. The c'end" you're talking about would be the end of all finalities together with an exacerbated, empty parody of their resurgence. There is no end in the sense that God is dead, or history is dead. I would prefer not to play the role of the lugubrious, thoroughly use less prophet. It is not a tragic event, something highly charged with emotion, something that you could mourn-for there would still be something to be done about it. Suddenly, there is a curve in the road, a turning point. Somewhere, the real scene has been lost, the scene where you had rules for the game and some solid stakes that everybody could rely on. 72 / Forget Baudrillarcl How did that happen? Has tl)ts really happened? That's fiction. History has stopped meaning, referring to anything whether you call it social space or the real. We have passed into a kind of hyper-real where things are being replayed ad infinitum. Traditional societies had no history but they had a mythology · we re discovering now that history may have been our own mythology. If we can cease believing in history, then maybe history had more to do with faith than fact. But then, what does it mean "to believe?" That would mean main taining some kind of subjectivity as a criterion of the validity of things. Now if credibility alone is what gives things meaning, then we're bound to remain trapped in the imaginary. What interests me instead (but can you still call this history?) is the possibility of a pure event, an event that can no longer be manip ulated, interpreted, or deciphered by any historical subjectivity. Can individual subjectivity be totally short-circuited by the event? The problematic of the subject implies that reality can still be rep resented, that things give off signs guaranteeing their existence and significance-in short, that there is a reality principle. All of that is now collapsing with the dissolution of the subject. This is the well known "crisis of representation." But just because this system of values is coming apart-the system which also supported the polit ical and theatrical scenes-that doesn't mean we are being left in a complete void. On the contrary, we are confronted with a more radical situation. Jean Baudri l l ard / 73 The tabula rasa brings out tendencies latent in the culture. It clears the ground. But there is a high price to pay in terms of emptiness and disenchantment. There you hate all the seduction, and the sadness, of nihilism. It is true that logic only leads to disenchantment. We can't avoid going a long way with negativity, with nihilism and all. But then don't you think a more exciting world opens up? Not a more reas suring world, but certainly more thrilling, a world where the name of the game remains secret. A world ruled by reversibility and indetermination . . . That's certainly radical· it leaves no roots. Radicality is not a more sublime virtue of theory. It means isolating in things whatever allows for interpretation, whatever overburdens them with meaning. I don't derive any malicious pleasure from this analysis; still, it gives me a curious sense of giddiness . . . But who's there to feel giddy? To exult in one's own disappearance is still another, more paradoxical, paroxysmalform ofsubjectivity. What's left once you've liquidated that overload of meaning? What remains is a good deal less than one would like to admit. Every system of value-in terms of energy, for example-seems to be crumbling down. You settledyour score with Marx in The Mirror of Production2• Why haven't you written a Mirror of Desire to have done with the judg ment ofFreud? 74 / Forgc:;t Baudrillard I can't bring myself to wrI te something on psychoanalysis. It would be useless to attack frontally its ideology or proclaim its demise . You have to allow desire to catch itself in its own trap. Desire was caught from the start. That's the reactive side ofany theo ry. You can only reveal a phenomenon if it is already disappearing. Where is hysteria now? Nowhere and everywhere. Often the pyramid of concepts is piled up sky high on top of an empty tomb. It is always the same sign that controls appearance and disappear ance. It presides over both. In the meantime, you're left to your own devices. There may be events, there may be a history. . . The history ofsexuality, for example. Sexuality has gone weightless. It is now reaching the state of "obscenity. " But everyone conspires to mask its disappearance by setting up trompe l'oeil stage decors.3 Psychoanalysis pretends to cure sexual neurosis, while it keeps on injecting it with a semblance of reality. Although far removed from the Freudian point of view, Foucault still participates in that nos talgic effect of theory. After all, paying so much attention to the genealogy of sexuality accredits the idea that it is still a space to be occupied. But it is more like Grand Central Station . . . I don't see the point of retracing the genealogy of sexuality. It's so true, so undeniable that there is nothing to say about it. ,Jean Baudri l l ard / 75 American sexuality is more Foucauldian than Foucault. In sex clinics here, masturbation has become a categorical imperative ifyou want to reach a synthetic genitality. Your position with respect to Foucault is of the same order. Foucault wrote the archeology ofthings; you take them to the point oftheir cryogenicization. In The Order of the simulacra, though your approach was pretty close to his . . . You're talking about the three orders? I could have made a book out of it, others rushed in to find examples. As for myself, with out denying it, I don't believe it holds up. For a time I believed in Foucauldian genealogy, but the order of simulation is antinomical to genealogy. An anti-genealogy then? No. If you take this logic to the extreme, what you get is the reab sorption of all genealogy. That's why I believe Foucault was unable to make the leap. What interests me is the mysterious point where he stops and finds nothing more to say. You keep criss-crossing Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari's path, breaking away from representation, rejecting dialectics, dismissing meaning and metaphor. 4 You part company with them on the terrain ofsubjectivity: they put the subject in flux, you abolish it. They make desire the basis of becoming; you see becoming as annihilating desire. I couldn't care less about desire. I neither want to abolish it nor to take it into consideration. I wouldn't know where to put it anymore. 76 / Forget Baudrlllard That's no surprise. You derIve your own energy from the collapse ofval ues. To make desire itself the basis of the system becomes redundant. What bothers me about desire is the idea of an energy at the source of all these fluxes. Is desire really involved? In my opinion, it has nothing to do with it. Well then, what does? Earlier on you mentioned disenchantment. The other, enchanting aspect, for me, is no longer desire, that is clear. It is seduction. Things .make events all by themselves, without any mediation, by a sort of instant commutation. There is no longer any metaphor, rather metamorphosis. Metamorphosis abolishes metaphor, which is the mode of language, the possibility of communicating mean ing. Metamorphosis is at the radical point of the system, the point where there is no longer any law or symbolic order. It is a process without any subject, without death, beyond any desire, in which only the rules of the game of forms are involved. Among other things, what psychoanalysis has to say about mythology is an abuse of metaphorical language. And what would correspond to that mythology in the order of meta morphosis? The possibility of transmutation: becoming-animal, becoming woman. What Gilles Deleuze says about it seemed to me to fit perfectly. 5 Love is no longer considered as a dependence of desire upon a lack, but in the unconscious form of the transformation into the Baudri l lard I Lotringer I 77 other. In that metamorphic unconscious nothing is repressed. The metaphor is by-passed. Conversely, in metastasis-the prolifera tion of bodies, obesity, cancer-there again, unfortunately, the subject no longer exists. There is no more language. Metaphor is no longer possible. And what do you see taking shape with the disappearance ofsubjectivity? Something rather paradoxical. There are three modes of disappear ance. Either the subject disappears in the cloning system, eliminating death. That has no charm. It is too much like an exter mination which is the proliferating metastatic form of the disappearance of the other. Or, you could have disappearance as death, which is the metaphorical form of the subject. Or else, dis appearance as a game, the art of disappearance. Alongside these modes of disappearance, the mechanical (cloning), organic (death), and ritual (game) forms, why not conceive ofa more lively way of disappearing? The possibility of assuming roles without identifying with them. One agrees to disappear, but in order to reap- pear somewhere else, where one is not expected. I conceive of that disappearance abstractly, with Deleuze, as a flux, but also as an absolute transparency. It is the loss of the real, the absolute distance of the real. One can no longer touch things. The only form ofthe real that remains, as I see it, is a shifting between things. Otherwise you are paralyzed-or vaporized. Paralysis is the panicky plea for identity. It's neurosis: wearing yourself out trying to pour into concrete what is slipping away in all directions. Evaporation 78 / ForQGt Baudriilard is chloroform, or ether. Dtsappearing without a trace. It chills you to the bone; it puts you to sleep, too. It's possible that in places like New York people can remain in a kind of positive, happy fluidity, a state of trans-pearing. But most people experience it as a kind of liquid terror. Is it worth abdicating all subjectivity in order to protect ourselves from terror? We're no longer in systems of real accomplishment; today they are necessarily potential, with the added bonus of risk, panic. The de subjectification of things. What's there to risk ifall subjectivity is being extinguished? We're condemned to effects of giddiness-in all the electronic games as well. There's no more pleasure, no more interest, but a kind of dizziness induced by the connections, the switching opera tions in which the subject gets lost. You manipulate all you want, without any objective, with the effect of aleatory giddiness of the potential systems where anything can happen. You pre.ftr pqnic to terror. Panic doesn't have to be unhappy. I see it as ecstasy. It's just a mode of propagation by contiguity, like contagion, only faster-the ancient principle of metamorphosis, going from one form to another without passing through a system of meaning. This process of effects in the absence of causes is a form of extraordinary Baudrillard / Lotringer / 79 expansion. The "speed" that Virilio talks about is an effect of panic with 'respect to movement.6 A giddiness effect. Panic can also be the inflation of the event by the news media. All the communication theories have to be revised, including my own, which is still too meaningful. People no longer seek to appropriate things, or even destroy them. Bataille's "devil's share" was still part of the ultimate romanticism of politi cal economy. Now it's something else.7 80 / Forget Baudrillard 2 Death and Metastasis D The Giddiness of Theory D Desire and Culture D "Objective" Necessity D Sociology and Metaphysics D The End of the Social D Symbolic Exchange and Destiny D The Fatal Between Chance and Necessity D Movement and Speed D The Ecstasy of Capital D Gambling as Extermination of Value D Statistics and Fate D Objective Chance without the Unconscious D The Chain of Appearances Sylvere Lotringer: What do you make ofdeath? Ofthe three modes of disappearance, it's clearly the one you are least interested in. It doesn't disappear for all that. . . Jean Baudrillard: Death has passed into either the history of meta morphoses or into metastatic h.istory. I found an article by Franz Bader, a German writer from the early 1 9th century, entitled "On Ecstasy as Metastasis." For him ecstasy' is the anticipation of death, a passage into the metastatic state of the living subject. Death is replaced by the passage of this point of inertia. 8 1 Every time I meet William Burroughs, I feel I'm in the presence of a fiesty corpse. As a living person he seems rather bored. I asked him if he would go to the moon. " Of course, " he replied. '1'd go anywhere; I'd leave the solar system if they came to get me in a flying saucer. " "Even if there is no coming back?" I asked. He looked at me. "Why come back?" I experienced the same feeling of no return during a trip to the United States a few years ago. It was a real shock. I had the revela tion that I was entering the period of the rest of my life from another point of view, in a state of complete irony with respect to what had gone before. When there is no fundamental passion, when life or love disappears, there is no longer any possibility of a multiplicity of modalities, with respect to love or existence. It's an extra helping, a little bit ecstatic, a little bit residual, but also pro foundly melancholic. Death is an event that has always already taken place. I've often wondered how one could live theories like yours. I got into it fairly late. For a long time, I was very "cool" about pro ducing theories. Of course there had to be an obsession behind it, but I didn't think it had very much to do with anything. It was a kind of game. I could write about death without it having any influence whatsoever on my life. When someone asked me, "What can we do with this? What are you really analyzing?" I took it very lightly, with great calm. You felt it had more to do with culture? 82 / Forget Baudrillard I 'd always kept my distance fl0m culture-as well as from theory. I maintained a position of distrust and rejection. That's the only "radicalness" I can claim. It might have something to do with my old pataphysical training: I don't want culture; I spit on it. If a the ory really becomes part of it, for me it's unspeakable. Several years ago, all that changed. Somewhere along the line I stopped living, in Canetti's sense. Something came unstuck. The giddiness I'm talking about ended up taking hold of me. A logical giddiness. Yes. I stopped working on simulation. I felt I was going totally nuts. Finally, by various paths, all this came to have extremely direct consequences on my life. It seemed logical that something would happen, an event of this kind-but I began to wonder what theory had to do with all this. There is in theories something that does away with the feeling of being "unstuck" But what theory brings back on the other hand, to reaccentuate it, pervert it-in the full sense of the word-I'd rather not know about. You spoke a bit earlier about the art ofdisappearance. , Disappearance is something completely different from death. Dying doesn't do any good, you still have to disappear. It is a mode assimilated to that of seduction. The death of meaning is not interesting in itself. Baudrillard / Lotringer / 83 Behaviorism puts an end to meaning. It does it more radically than we do. There meaning is truly erased, but it doesn't disappear. Pragmatism is the same as simulation pushed to the limit. Simulation puts an end to meaning absolutely, in its neutralizing, undifferentiated form. But it does it without prestige, without charm, without plea sure, without any of the effects of disappearance which are the best we can afford today. You rediscover desire in charm. Something of desire would have to remain, otherwise . . . I only resented desire in the cultural acceptance it gained. Actually desire is a term that managed to get out of the test of reality-if you'll pardon the expression-while still retaining a certain poetic density. It wasn't killed, it remains-on condition that it stays out of the libidinal. It's desire as seduction. In seduction, all the energy that you gathered for yourself is turned over to the object. Objective necessity occurs-an absolute surprise which takes away the effectiveness of the subject. Exchange exerts a similar effect, but the subject's disappearance is ofa statistical order. It melts into "the masses, " which are conceived as an infinite commutation of individual clones-the mass as circulation, not immobility or assembly, ofcourse. 8 Neutralization is a statistical fiction, a sociologist's point of view reporting the existence ofa flat encephalogram on the level of culture. 84 / Foroet Baudri llard Well, let's be frank here. If I ever dabbled in anything in my theo retical infancy, it was philosophy more than sociology. I don't think at all in those terms. My point of view is completely metaphysical. If anything, I'm a metaphysician, perhaps a moralist, but certainly not a sociologist. The only "sociological" work I can claim is my effort to put an end to the social, to the concept of the social.9 You proclaimed the end of the social I guess, by contrast with another more archaic form, which Marcel Mauss defined as the "total social fact. " What does that symbolic, or agonistic exchange of traditional societies mean to you now? Do you still believe it has a bearing on post industrial societies? 1 0 Actually in traditional socIetIes exchange is absent. Symbolic exchange is the opposite of exchange. The term is rather deceptive. There is an order of exchange and an order of fate. The only means of exorcising fate is through exchange; in other words, through a contractual agreement. Where exchange is not possible, fate takes over. In the case of the hostage, whenever exchange becomes impossible, you move into the order of the fatal, of the catastrophe. There is a dual reversibility, an agonistic challenge. Negotiation is no longer possible. From there on, anything can happen. I call symbolic exchange fatal: I am led to it by chance. Fate is in the dividing line separating chance and necessity, to use Jacques Monod's terms. 1 1 Neither one wipes out the order of events. One-necessity-is based on an order of causes, of finality, a system of values which is that of metaphysics. The other-chance-is based on an objective Baudrillard / Lotringer / 85 by an undet,ermined and erratic order. What I wanted to define with the "fatal" order is an objective order, but of the highest neces sity. The question of finality no longer applies. An event-or a being, or a word-resolves all efforts at explanation; it imposes itself with a force which is no longer of the final or causal order. It is more final than final: it is fatal. The way speed is more mobile than movement-its pure form, inde pendent ofany destination. Yes, speed is the ecstatic form of movement. In ecstasy, there is no . longer any stage-no more scene, no more theatre. But there is no more passion either. It is intense, but dispassionate. It can carry a charge of seductiveness, for seduction is an ecstatic form. The fatal is ecstasy in the form of an event, in the same way that free-float ing capital is an ecstatic form of the circulation of money. They no longer bear any relationship to production. It is the extreme form of the logic of capital. The ecstatic form of capital is totally generalized exchange. An orbital form. In merchandise, money is already in process of de referentialization. It is the transpoliticized form of merchandise. Look at what happens in the movement of money-money no longer bears any relationship to value, even in the sense in which Bataille uses the term (in order for there to be something "spent," one must still believe in value) . That is what gives rise to intense miraculous effects of multiplication. The secret of gambling is that money does not exist as a value. 86 / FOr j8t Bauclri llard But value returns afttr tht fact.· its what you have to pay ifyou lose. Afterward, you commit suicide. But in the heat of the moment, the idea of winning or losing is relatively unimportant compared to the seductive sequence of events. Gambling is the ecstatic form of money. Gambling isn't exactly a passion: the pleasure one derives from it is too crystalline. It is a cold ecstasy which deals with money not as meaning, value, depth or substance, but in the pure form of appearance or disappearance. It's a form of imminence. Yes, but there's nothing behind it. It's the imminence of itself. Gambling is an organized catastrophic, apparitional form-a total metamorphosis. It's a game with a subject. This would explain the fascination it holds: to gamble is to forget yourself The extreme form of neurosis and its annulment. Gambling is a game, a challeng . There is no gambling subject: the transubstantiation is complete. It's pure seduction. It comes from elsewhere. In theory gambling is without consequence. This is why it's so easy to condemn the "immorality" of gambling. Gambling is immoral. It bears no relation to the reality of money. It feeds on itself Baudrillard / Lotrinoer / 87.....-f Ies the passion of arriving at a given object: money, in this case and managing to completely disconnect it, to discover its means of appearing. I didn't say its means of production; we know that only too well, and it's no fun. Wherever you can find the possibility of pure appearances, you are once again in the game. It's in this sense that I no longer situate myself in the irreversible order of annihila tion. The possibility of returning to a level of metamorphosis or seduction cannot be lost. There's only fate. But first this has to pass through a rage to destroy, to exterminate everything. There has to be extermination. In the final account, ies extremely rare that something can get out of the chain of cause and effect to fully appear. It is the ephemeral moment in which things take the time to appear before taking on meaning or value. What is fasci nating then-what makes that moment an event-is that a mode of sociality can be created which is not the mode of exchange but occurrence of pure events. The statistical occurrence, on the con trary, is flat, numerical, without sequence. It is nothing but contiguity and measurement. We live in a world that is very loose, quite lax, in which things are more or less arbitrary, disconnected and therefore sporadic, erratic. The order of the fatal, on the other hand, is the site of symbolic exchange. There is no more liberty, everything is locked in a sequential chain. That was already the case with the primitive ceremonial. I don't exclude rituals and ceremonies. Whatever reaches the level of pure appearance-a person, an event, an act-enters the realm 88 / ForQot Baudril lard of the fatal. It cannot be decJ phered or interpreted. The subject has nothing to say about it. Events emerge from any and every place, but from an absolute beyond, with that true strangeness which alone is fascinating. It belongs neither to the order of the normal nor to the accidental. It is a necessity greater than the law, some thing like objective chance without any effect of the unconscious, whose fate would be repressed. A successful event leaves nothing behind it. In the finalities that one can assign oneself, values are always rela tive. They must be invested. They are necessary, but subjectively. For example, the fetishistic object topples the subj ect's need to place itself in the transcendental center of the world. On the con trary, at any given moment the universe has the possibility of incarnating itself in a detail which is unjustifiable in its own right. The universal no longer exists, there is nothing left but a singularity which can take on the aspect of totality. Singularities, in the Hegelian sense, have a particularity and a uni versal aspect. They are moments. Yes, whereas now singularities very likely no longer have any uni versal becoming. The universal is a game preserve, it is the site of that indifferent strategy. It cannot be assigned an end, a reason, a meaning. It is total crystallization around an event. Deleuze dealt with this problematic in Logic of Sense. 1 2 But for him, the logic 0/appearances, the play o/surfaces does not abolish subjectivity. Baudrillard / Lotringer / 89 For me events are no longer those of the subject; they reach a point where they function all by themselves. It is a pure connection of events in a logic of appearances, if you like, which meets seduction. The order of seductive connections stands in opposition to rational connections, whatever they may be, and also to delirious connec tions, and possibly to molecular ones. It is not an order of the accidental; an accident does not fascinate me in that sense. The cat astrophe does not fascinate me as an accident, it fascinates me as a necessity. That appearances function all by themselves is based on a necessity much more implacable than the chain of causes which is for its part relatively arbitrary, as is the connection of the signifier and the signified. The connection, the chain of appearances are signs that do not, in fact, make sense. There is a rule to the game. 90 / Forget Bau d rillard 3 Law and Rules 0 Crisis, Catastrophe 0 Poetry 0 A Sign is as Good as the Thing Itself 0 Femininity, Childhood D "Strategy" of the Fatal D The Principle of Evil D Model and Truth D Beyond Esthetic Judgement D Fashion, Politics D The Ecstacy of Forms D The Media Doesn't Mystify D Beau Brummel 0 Power/Knowledge/ Will D Revolution, Devolution D May '68, an Inconsequential Event. Sylvere Lotringer: Is the fatal the fulfillment ofan empty rule? Jean Baudrillard: A rule can be perfectly arbitrary in its enunciation, but it is much more unbreakable than the "law," which can be trans gressed. You can do anything with the law. With the rule, on the other hand, either you play or you don't play. If you play, the rule is implaca ble. You can't get around it. It would be idiotic to transgress it. The rule of the game-the seductive sequence-is played in an extremely cer emonialized fashion. Situations can be replayed indefinitely, the "rule" does not change. But it is secret, never known, never spoken. If it were known, things would become visible and reversible again. With causal or rational sequences, you have crisis. With seductive sequences, on the contrary, you are-literally-in a catastrophic order. 9 1 That's the logic of the avalanche. Forms that are beyond judgment have a much greater power of fas cination, but they are for that same reason terribly dangerous for any order whatsoever. They can no longer be controlled. At any given moment a category or a form stops representing itself, it no longer enters the stage of representation, it no longer functions according to its end. It doubles back upon itself, taking a curve so rapid that it reaches a kind of potentialization. All the rest goes into a state of weightlessness. In the language of poetry we are familiar with those sequences in which things seem to take place without continuity, without consequence, without mediation. Language is always an order of seduction to the extent that it is a mutant order. If you suppose continuous, progressive, linear order then it is still based on a mutational "superstructure. " Words in a poem are of that order. They do not go through meaning. One word calls forth another in a catastrophe of charm. One leads to another in a thoughtless, unintelligible way. I am not seeking the irrational. On the contrary, we know that there is a necessity without its being transcendental or providential. The same thing can take place in the order of facts, of actions, of existential situations. It is ritual without the sacred, the tragic without the tragedy. It is not a sacred universe, even though there is indeed a tragic aspect in seduction. If you accept the rule of the game, you can never know in advance to what degree of concatenation of appear ances a strategy may lead. Take, for example, the story of the woman to whom a man sends an ardent love letter. She asks him what part of her seduced him the most. What else can he answer? 92 / For oc't Be ll i jrlll ird Her eyes, of course. And he l eceives in the mail, wrapped in brown paper, the woman's eye. The man is shattered, destroyed. The woman sets herself as the destiny of the other. Literalizing the metaphor, she abolishes the symbolic order. The sign becomes the thing. The subject is caught in the trap of his own desire. She loses an eye, he loses face. In On Seduction you took another metaphor literal  that of the woman object. 13 It meant (in appearance at least) taking feminism against the grain, with, I believe, unexpected potentializations. I consider woman the absence of desire. It is of little import whether or not that corresponds to real women. It is my concep tion of "femininity. " Isn't it surprising that in the midst ofmetamorphoses, the feminine fig- ,- ure for you remains fixed. That's very nostalgic, that polarity of roles. But I don't believe in it. For me, femininity is non-polar. Contrary to masculinity, woman has no anxious focalization on sex, she can transform herself into herself. That means becoming-woman is something that can occur in women . or tn men. Of course. Femininity appears in certain individuals, men or women. But woman is the object which plays out all the liquidi ties of desire. The drama of love is entirely in men, that of charm completely in women. Baud ri l l ard / Lotrin jor· / 93 Speaking of love, you replace intersubjectivity with a reciprocal transformation. A passage into the other, but an other which is no longer there. That is the problem of otherness. As in the world, or on the terrain of sex, no one is the other of the other sex any longer. It is not nar cissism, which is a concretion accomplished in solitude; not otherness either. Each one functions within his/her own nebula, accomplishing his/her own virtuality. IfI understand, the process of becoming-woman common to both sexes is the accomplishment of each one as a separate object. Their recipro cal challenge is to become more woman than woman, in a word, to attain that femininity which each one can attain only in relationship to himselflherself I think here of the strategic position of the process of becoming object. What interests me now is no longer the subject but the object and its destiny. You become the destiny of the other. It is clearer when you think of childhood. The child always has a dou ble strategy. He has the possibility of offering himself as object, protected, recognized, geared as a child to the pedagogical func tion; and at the same time he is fighting on equal terms. At some level the child knows that he is not a child, but the adult does not know that. That is the secret. That's what is fueling the hysterical campaign against "child abuse. " Adults panic in the face of the extermination of childhood, which on the other hand, they are encouraging. Childhood consti tutes the last anchor of our culture. If childhood were lost, what 94 / Forget Bal lCirillnrd wo uld morality be bastd on! The social repression of ''child moles ters " is all the more ferocious, 1 4 The problem is that everything has been unleashed on childhood. There has been quite a "palingenesis" on childhood, no psychoan alytic joke intended; now there it has been taken seriously. The category of childhood is defined historically, and there psychology begins: child psychology, therapy, pedagogy, it all follows. If, going against every assumption, you maintain the little utopian fact that childhood does not exist and that the child is perhaps the only one to know it, then everything blows up in your face. That is what I was trying to say about women. Women, children, animals-we must not be afraid of assimilations-do not just have a subject consciousness, they have a kind of objective ironic presentiment that the category into which they have been placed does not exist. Which allows them at any given moment to make use of a double I · ') h i "strategy. t Isn t psyc 0 ogy, It s strategy. When you speak of the strategy of the fatal, what interests me most is the strategy. What is to be done? No, it's completely antinomical. It's not really strategy. That's a play on words to dramatize the total passage from the subject to the object. Whether you call it the revenge of the object, or the Evil Genius of matter, it is not representable. But it is a power all the same. In fact, I would go along with calling it the principle of Evil, of irreconciliation, the way the Good is the principle of reconcilia tion. That exists, it is inextricable, it cannot be destroyed. Baudrillard / Lotrin J8r / 95 Can you still invoke a strategy to account for situations In which the subject has no place? Only an "objective" strategy that no one could recognize. What I foresee is a transposition of all forms and the impossibility of any politics. There is something like a threshold of inertia. Beyond that, forms snowball, terror is unleashed as an empty form. Panic. Right. It's the other form of the ecstatic, its catastrophic form, in the almost neutral sense of the term, in its mathematical extension. It is a completely alien response of the object world to the subject world, of a completely external destiny which occurs with an absolute surprise and whose symbolic wave strikes the human world. You see several sides to ecstasy? I see two. Take a model. Its ecstatic side is to be truer than the truth; it creates a kind of giddiness, a kind of inflation of truth. A model is a rather pathetic thing. But take fashion for example. Fashion participates in this phenomenon absolutely. It doesn't depend on any sort of esthetic judgment. It's not the beautiful opposed to the ugly, it's what's more beautiful than the beautiful. The obese-that famous fat American-is not opposed to the skin ny one. He is fatter than fat, and that is fascinating. Fashion is the absolute formalization of the beautiful. It functions by means of the unconditional transmutation of forms. Ecstatic forms can be static and cold; sometimes they can be more enchanting, warmer. 96 / Forget Baudril lard Thel e is a splendor of fashion, and, behind it, an uncontrollable rule of the game. A rule which conveys the objective irony of fash ion. Everything that can be invented deliberately falls flat on its face, and it's something else that catches on instead. Can fashion serve as a modelfor politics? Fashion has always been at odds with politics and scorned by poli tics. But you cannot politically oppose fashion to politics. Fashion is a splendid form of metamorphosis. It is both a ritual and a cere mony. It can't be programmed. Could happy, ecstatic politicalforms be conceived of? It's rather difficult to sort out happy and unhappy forms. Seduc tion, like fashion, is  a happy form, beyond the beauty of desire: "I am not beautiful, I am worse. " Seduction uses signs which are already simulators to make them into the falser than false. It dis places them, turns them into traps and produces a splendid effect snatched from the imperative of veracity of signs, and even of desire, which is no longer at stake. Must all political rituals necessarily be programmed? Politics functioned in terms of distinctive oppositions: the left or the right. As in other areas you have the true or the false, the beau tiful or the ugly, etc. Now, at a given point the energy of a situation stopped depending on this kind of dissociation. It is no longer the dialectic of the two terms that organizes things, but the fact that the forms each go their separate ways, meaninglessly, senselessly. It Baudrillard / Lotringer / 97 is the truer than true, or the falser than false. A form shoots off in a kind of relentless logic, uncalculated, without any history, without any memory, the way cancer cells go off in an organic direction. That logic seems to me more interesting because it does after all correspond more to the way things are evolving nowadays. Where do you see that logic at work in the politicalfield right now? In the media? The media are supposed to be a fabulous distortion. But behind that analysis still lurks a symbolic demand for truth. Where does that dis tortion come from? Placing the media in the system of will-choice-liberty is really hopeless. All you can do is invoke a total alienation of the political subject, accuse the power structure of manipulating, etc. The power structure doesn't manipulate Tv, it functions exactly the way it does. It relies on representations, it also secretes them with the scant political relief of a TV image, without accuracy or energy, to the point of merging with the civil society in the indistinction of the political scene. Meaning manages to disap pear in the horizon of communication. The media are simply the locus of this disappearance, which is always a challenge to the pow ers that be. It's becoming urgent to reformulate a theory of the media as "agents provocateurs" of information overload, turning political debate into a gigantic abyss. Let's get rid of the notion that the media mystify and alienate. We've had enough of that. The theory ofalienation has become the echo necessary to the media for their existence. It amounts indirectly to giving them the benefit of an intention. They don't deserve that. 98 / ForQot Baudri Hard You're right. In the transpolitical, there is no more who. Then if it isn't the power structure, which seems pretty clear, if there is no longer a subject, is there a strategy of the object, objective irony? The media industry never does anything but reproduce its own necessity. As William Burroughs says it plainly enough: all things considered, the public could get along very well without the news. There you have it. All that is done now is to display a range of choices which are all equally potential or fulfilled. Have you heard this story about Beau Brummel? He traveled a great deal, always in the company of his manservant. One day he was in Scotland, in a region where there are many lakes, each one more beautiful than the other. Brummel turned to his servant and asked him, "Which lake do I prefer?" Having to choose is really a bore. That's what servants are for. In any case, that's not what counts. Power-Knowledge Will-let the inventors of those ideas take responsibility for them. It makes perfect sense to me that the great masses, very snobbishly, delegate to the class of intellectuals, of politicians, this business of managing, of choosing, of knowing what one wants. They are joyously dumping all those burdensome categories that no one, deep down inside, really wants any part oE That people want to be told what they want is certainly not true; it is not clear either that they really want to know what they want, or that they desire to want at all. The whole edifice of socialism is based on that assumption. They start from the fact that this is what people ought to want, that they are social in the sense that they are supposed to know themselves, know what they want. I think we have pressed beyond that point, beyond truth, beyond reality. Baud ri l lard I Lotringer / 99 Objective irony, that would be the masses' offhand way ofgetting rid of their responsibilities, turning power back to its fantasies, knowl edge to its obsessions, will to its illusions. The silent majority, as you see it then, is not the accomplice of law and order, but rather its silence is a dead silence. The masses are playing dead. And this stub born silence, this insolent reserve, would sanction the disappearance of the social. Exactly. Large systems of information relieve the masses of the responsibility of having to know, to understand, to be informed, to be up on things. Advertising relieves people of the responsibil ity of having to choose, which is perfectly human and perfectly horrible. As for power, it has always seemed ironic to me to dele gate it to people. That's like catching them in a trap, and that trap closes on the political class itself. I see all of this as a profound reversal of strategy on the part of the masses. They are no longer involved in a process of subversion or revolution, but in some gigantic devolution from an unwanted liberty-with some evil genius lurking behind it all. I think we are beginning to realize how much terror lies at the heart of the paradise of communica tion. Beyond that, events are inconsequential, and that is even more true for theories. But there is power in the fact of being inconsequential. That was what interested me about May '68 . Behind the political, revolutionary, and historical scene, and also behind the failure, there was the power of an event which managed to absorb its own continuity. It makes it implode, succeeds in swallowing its own energy and disappearing. 1 00 / Forgot Baudri l lard May '68 swept down on France like an avalanche, and no sooner had it appeared than it disappeared mysteriously, practically without a trace. Then where has all that energy gone? Nowhere-certainly not into socialism in any case. It must have been reabsorbed somewhere without necessarily remaining underground so as to emerge later. For me May '68 was the first event that corresponded to this iner tial point of the political scene. Continuity disappears. Only such things are fascinating. Baudrillard / Lotrlnger I 1 0 1 4 Going to Extremes D The Scenario of Deterrence D Terrorism and Hyperreality D The Impossible War D Fascism and Trans politics D May '68 D Two Forms of Secret D The Ecstasy of Socialism D The Story of Sophie Calle D Ends, Means D Power Doesn't Exist D God's Strategy D Italy in Political Simulation D The Challenge to the Social Sylvere Lotringer: Comprehension is no longer involved there. Jean Baudrillard: No. But more comprehension is going to be re secreted. It is intolerable for everybody that events should be incon sequential, or that their own desires. should be inconsequential. And, in the last analysis, that theory should be inconsequential. No exceptions allowed. All ofthat is part ofwhat Paul Virilio calls c'the aesthetic ofdisappearance. "15 From time to time theory allows itself beautiful effects of disap pearance. What more can one do? In terms of results there is no difference between what came to an end with May '68 and whatever 1 03 Giscard d'Estaing or Mitterand accomplished. Acceleration per mits another kind of disappearance effect, another order that can't be reached in any other way. Therefore, I agree with Paul Virilio on the idea of theory going to extremes. You will ask me, why are peo ple going to those extremes, if you don't suppose that at some point the world, and the universe, too, is in the grips of a movement to extremes. There you are, apparently, forced to make an almost objective, rational hypothesis. It is impossible to think that theory can be nothing more than fiction. Otherwise no one would bother producing theory any more. You have to believe that going some where is not just a metaphor. And then, if it is a challenge, in any case there is a partner. It is no longer a dialectic, but there is a rule of the game. Somewhere there must be a limit that constitutes the real in order for there to be theory. A point where things can stick, or from which they can take off For Virilio there is definitely a trend toward extremes at work in the world today: the military class is swallowing up civilian society before disappearing itself in a suicidal race.16 Virilio's calculation is to push the military to a kind of extreme absolute of power, which can only ultimately cause its own down fall, place it before the judgment of God and absorb it into the society it destroys. Virilio carries out this calculation with such an identification or obsession that I can only credit him at times with a powerful sense of irony: the system devours its own principle of reality, inflates its own empty forms until it reaches an absolute and its own ironic destiny of reversal. I myself am not so interested in military hardware, but in software. It's the form of his idea that strikes me as valid. 1 04 / Foruot [3nudri l lard The state of emergency, the risk of nuclear extermination-you can dismiss all that? Why, of course I think about it, but for me there is no fatal term. The nuclear threat is part of a "soft" mode of extermination, bit by bit, by deterrence, not at all an apocalyptic term. It is the sce nario of deterrence that Paul Virilio shares with me, apparently, because he moves back and forth between the real term and the mythical term, which is mine. For me, it's in the realm of the intellectual wager. If there were an absolute term of the nuclear apocalypse in the realm of the real, then at that point I would stop, I wouldn't write anymore! God knows, if the metaphor really collapses into reality, I won't have any more to do. That would not even be a question of resignation-it's no longer possible to think at that point. The implosive side of the nuclear threat paralyzes everything. It's more than deterrence, it's political tetanus. Virilio is very interested in strategic vicissitudes; I don't have the patience. Does the nuclear threat have a political term? Or does it make it disappear when the bomb hits the ground? It's the same as for the media, I no longer attach any importance to it. Can there be a political management of a material that is "transpolitical?" I don't see where it could come from. Let's go back to your analysis ofterrorism, which led you to discard the concept of the social. For a number of years we witnessed a trend toward extremes in the confrontation between the Red Army Faction and the German government. Now what was the final outcome? A Baudrillard / Lotrin Jer / 1 05 challenge; implosive forms of confrontation? Not at all. Once the extremes were eliminated (the Baader-Meinhof "suicides" at Stammheim), the possibility was established ofbargaining, ofstriking a compromise. Politics regained the upper hand, and history with it. Terrorism can have a visible, a spectacular form. It is still part of the dramatic, practically, in the historical realm. So it can be succeeded by a kind of negotiable terror. The term "hostage," as I have used it, would then qualify not only the visible dramas of the taking of hostages, but rather the hyperreality of everyday life which is situ ated well beyond negotiable terror. It's the same as for deterrence. It's not the actual terror of the orbiting bombs' power of destruc tion; Virilio says that very clearly. War having also become an impossible exchange, the hostage would only qualify a situation in which all exchange has become impossible. '-%r is perhaps impossible.· it continues nonetheless everywhere you look. People get killed, people die in war, of course. But it would still involve a kind of conspiracy to setup a trompe l'oeil decor, the way city planners make provisions for parks and greenery. The history of Europe is perhaps of that order-an effort to circumscribe Europe as a space of freedom, a political space, etc., to escape that panic of the insolubility, the impossibility of a declared war, of a war which can really signify itself. It is set up as a war space in an attempt to somehow alter, however minimally, the situation of generalized dissuasion, which is intolerable. The consequences are felt at some point with this blockage, this leukemia of political life which is unbearable for everybody, for the ruling classes as well as for those who are ruled. But at this point war certainly no longer 1 06 Forqot Baudri llard has the same meaning, nor does art, or politics, or the hostage. Everything takes on another existence, with different stakes. You once tried, along with Virilio, to theorize the concept ofthe "trans political?" Is the transpolitical situated on the other side ofthe political logic ofconsequences? Can that be a way ofsaving the political? The efforts to save it, that is what we are witnessing all around us. Those efforts are occupying the scene. The present, or recent, form of socialism in France-I call it "ecstatic"-in that sense it is trans political. It proceeds from a model. Socialism realizes, hyperrealizes a model which no longer has any veracity or original passion. The transpolitical would be a negative notion then. It's the same scene, but emptied out from within. In that sense, yes. That is part of the exterminating analysis. I'm not crazy about the term itself. It's almost too "figurative. " It sig nifies that there could still be a beyond, and that we ought to go and take a look at what's going on there. I prefer the formulation in terms of that point Canetti describes. We don't know what happened after that. The traditional points of reference are no longer usable, but we don't know what we are in. To demand a degree of truth is always problematical. Fascism was already something like that. It was a kind of potentialization. That is why it remains relatively inexplicable in political terms, such as capitalism or class struggle. There is a secret to fascism. Baudrillard / Lotringer / 1 07 Yes. It derives its overwhelming necessity precisely from its being isolated and disconnected, as in the case of the catastrophe, but this necessity is far beyond any rational finality. The secret lies in that total autonomy of a narrative, of a form, a myth that can no longer be described in a logical, coherent and acceptable manner, but runs amok. Past a certain threshold of inertia, forms start snowballing, stampeding, and terror is unleashed as an empty form. There comes about a swept away effect, an effect that feeds on itself and can become the source of immense energies, as fas cism did, unfortunately. When effects go faster than causes, they devour them. I could easily see the "speed-up" analyzed by Virilio from this angle, as an attempt to accelerate faster than linearity can. Movement goes somewhere, speed goes nowhere. May '68 was an illogical event, irreducible to simulation, one which had no status other than that of coming from someplace else-a kind of pure object or event. Its strangeness derives from a logic of our own system, but not from its history. It is a prodigious effect, and it is situated or. the other side of that crucial point Canetti describes and that I mentioned earlier. The cause of an event is always imagined after the fact. After that jolly May  we were treated to the curious spectacle of causes racing after effects. May '68 is an event which it has been impossible to rationalize or exploit, from which nothing has been concluded. It remains inde cipherable. It was the forerunner of nothing. There are no children ofMay. 1 08 / Forqet Bauclrillard"-J Perhaps a kind of " secl et" IS involved here too. Tell me about secrets. There are fundamentally two kinds of secrets. The obscene form of the secret involves a saturation of the event with explanations. The other kind involves something which is not hidden and therefore cannot be expressed directly in words. It is this second kind of secret which makes the event somehow innocent. Now what can you do with that? Ordinarily, when things happen, you pick them up as best you can as a subject. In the case of May '68, we have been forced to give all our subjective energy to the object. The event becomes a kind of slippery object that refers each subject back to his/her own fantasies without ever allowing itself to be touched. That event disappeared without leaving a trace other than this secondary and parodic effect, this second or third-hand product manufactured to occupy a political scene that has been utterly absorbed and destroyed: French socialism. The socialists' error is to have occupied the vacuum and to have allowed themselves to be sucked into the black hole ofpolitics. There are two ways of seeing this. You can say there used to be a political sphere and there isn't anymore, following a Foucauldian genealogy. That was how Foucault talked about man. There is no longer a scene of politics the way it was organized around the his tory of power relations, production, classes. Power is no longer an Baudrillard / Lotringer I 1 09 objective, locatable process. This is what I say is lost, if we can speak of an end of something. We are elsewhere. If, on the con trary, the political sphere consists in knowing how to play on an event or a thing on the basis of its obj ective or conscious end but in order to ward it off-then power, in political terms, becomes a kind of challenge. A challenge from the powers that be not to exercise power? I wonder, in fact, if true power, the power that deepens the mean ing of politics, is not the one that pulls back from itself, that plays out its own death, without even willing it consciously. The secret of power is that it can no longer be occupied, no longer be taken. When "power" is confused with the "power structure," you know it is no longer power. It becomes extremely vulnerable. Could we not conceive this phenomenon in a more active fashion? The political as the art of not occupying a position yourself, but creating a voidfor others to rush into it. The political sphere must keep secret the rule of the game that, in reality, power doesn't exist. Its strategy is, in fact, always creating a space of optical illusion, maintaining itself in total ambiguity, total duplicity in order to throw the others into this space. This is Machiavelli's strategy. It is also the story ofSophie Calle. 1 7 Right. For no particular reason, as you know, she followed a stranger in the street; she became his shadow and thus, in a certain 1 1 0 / Forget Baudrillard sense, erased his traces, acted as his destiny. Creating a void, she asked the other to fill it. She herself is nothing. She has no desire of her own in all this. She doesn't want to go anywhere, even though she follows him all the way to Venice. She doesn't want to find out what he is or to know his life. She is the proof that, although he thought he was going somewhere, in fact he is going nowhere. Where he supposedly is, there's no one. We could envi sion this story in terms of Balthazar Gracian. Is God's strategy really to lead man to his own ends, in other words to move man closer to the image of God according to a progressive-evolutionary process? God isn't so dumb, Gracian says. Nowhere does it say that man wants to arrive at his own end, which would be the idea of God in its canonical form. God's strategy is much more subtle, which no doubt corresponds to man's desire not to give a shit about his own end. God's strategy-that of all the Jesuit manuals that were incredibly widespread in the seventeenth century-is to keep man in an eternal suspense. And that is in the order of politics, which reveals God as being fairly malicious, perverse, given man's faculty to erect almost anything as a finality. Any possible illusion to avoid the Last Judgment, which is truly Hell. In fact, politics is always in a contrary, twisted, or simply "seductive" relation to its own ends. God is much more interested in the game, in the possi bility of playing with ends, even using means. Furthermore, this proposition-the end and the means-has always favored the ends at the expense of the means. Since the means are immoral, the ends must be moral. But we could very well turn the proposition around, and this is precisely what the Jesuits do: play with the means, whatever, for the ends cannot be found anymore. For the Jesuits, and this is their basic proposition, it is impossible to estab lish a proof of God's existence. So all right, God exists, the grace of Baudrillard / Lotringer / 1 1 1 God exists, but it has nothing to do with us because what we're dealing 'with is a strategic worldliness. And with this you can play. There are only means. In Simulations, what especially interested me, in fact, was the possi bility ofeffecting this kind ofdiversion. I was struck by the fact that the Italians-in particular certain figures ofthe Autonomia movement 1 8_ when confronted with an emergency situation, found in certain ofyour propositions, even ifthey were disenchanted ones, instruments that they immediately tried to use politically. Instead ofrespecting your own ends {or their absence as ends.. .J, they took certain ofyour concepts asfloating theoretical tools capable of being reinvested in particular situations. In short, they diverted your own diversion. I admit that I like this practical perversion ofyour own theoretical perversion. That indeed seems to me to be the situation in Italy. Everyone seems to be party to prolonging a situation that isn't exactly polit ical-in any case, no one can pull the strings anymore. The situation is seductive because of that kind of indecisiveness with which everyone plays without necessarily being aware of it. I like that Italian ability to turn around, turn away an objective state that would otherwise be catastrophic: the State could have disappeared a long time ago, along with politics. In fact, the State has never existed there . . . I think that every other country is in the same situation, despite appearances to the contrary. They are all in a situation of political simulation, but on the sly. Italy, on the other hand, seems to be exercising the simulacrum as such, seduction as such. 1 1 2 / Forgot Baudri llard The simulacrum supports politics, instead of wiping it out. The Italians have a long tradition of all this with the Jesuits and the Church-in the way Nietzsche meant. For them, the end is always imminent, but at the same time there is a possibility of almost joyful resurrection with each event, and that is phenomenal. We certainly couldn't say the same of Poland . . . Who are ideologically active cannot help fantasizing about a world that would make more sense, or that would return to sense. And so you get to terrorism, which invokes an enormous fantasy of a political order, of the State, the better to murder it, to massacre it. But what game is terrorism playing? Terrorism makes no more sense than the State does. They are accomplices in a circular set up. In Germany as in Italy (neither country has ever been unified or cen tralized), terrorism helps the State appear. It's the role of a partner more than of an adversary. It's always like that: events are played out on a conscious level of adversity, of war, of irreconcilable, incompatible ideologies, but in reality what's happening underneath it all? Who would dream that the situation can become so totally terroristic that in fact it joins its other extreme? I don't see how all this can end. It is not objectively representable. You see in the terrorist act, as in nuclear confrontation between the Great Powers (which is, in fact, State terrorism), not an explosive phenomenon, but the point at which the social implodes. But what is "the social?" You hypostatize a complex reality in an abstraction, only to immediately send the abstraction back to the domain of unreality and proclaim its end. Isn't that a bit too easy? Baud ri l lard / Lotringer / 1 1 3 But I take the social as already hypostatized. From hypostasis to ecstasy! If the social doesn't exist  if it has never existed outside of the theoreti cal imagination  then it can't implode. All right, that's entirely plausible. And yet you could also state the hypothesis that at a given moment the social did exist, but not at all as a representation of society, nor in a positive sense, but rather as a challenge to the reality of things, as a virulent myth. This is how Georges Bataille saw sociology: as a challenge to the very nature of the social and to society. History also existed in that sense. But then, that's not really existence, because when history begins to exist, very quickly there's nothing left but to treat it as an instance of jurisdiction and meaning. I have never resolved that ambiguity between being and existence; I believe it's insoluble. 1 1 4 / Forget Baudri l lard 5 The Challenge to the Real 0 A Geoseismic View of Things 0 Theory as Event 0 The Art of Disappearance D The Vortex of Implosion D Seduction D The Malice of the Social D The Slipper iness of Forms D The Evil Genius of Theory D Extermination 0 Metaphysics and Metatheory D "Forgetting" Theory D Myth and Serials D The Media's Anti-Destiny Sylvere Lotringer: For Nietzsche, the philosopher must decipher action. He must actively evaluate the forces confronting each other in society. You conceive of the social as the depletion of an empty form. What role, then, do you attribute to theory? Must it be a virulent myth, as it is for Bataille? But if the social has become weightless, what does myth attack? Andfor what cause? Jean Baudrillard: I admit, that question of theory troubles me. Where is theory situated today? Is it completely satellized? Is it wandering in realms which no longer have anything to do with real facts? What is analysis? As long as you consider that there is a real world, then by the same token there is a possible position for theory. Let us say a dialectical position, for the sake of argument. Theory 1 1 5 and reality can still be exchanged at some point and that is ide ality. There is after all a point of contact between the two. And then you can transform the world, and theory does transform the world. That is not at all my position anymore. Moreover, it never was. But I have never succeeded in formulating it. In my opinion, theory is simply a challenge to the real. A challenge to the world to exist. Very often a challenge to God to exist. But there is more than theory. In the beginning, religion, in its former heretical phase, was always a negation-at times a violent one-of the real world, and this is what gave it strength. After that, religion became a process of reconciliation rather than a pleasure or reality princi ple. This can hold true for theory as well: a theory can attempt to reconcile the real with theory itself. And then there is a principle of antagonism-an absolutely irreconcilable, almost Manichaean antagonism. You maintain a position of challenge, which is differ ent from unreality. Still isn't that exactly what you do: make stakes unreal by pushing them to the limit? But I hold no position on reality. Reality remains an unshakeable postulate toward which you can maintain a relation either of adver sity or of reconciliation. The real-all things considered, perhaps it exists-no, it doesn't exist-is the insurmountable limit of theory. The real is not an objective status of things, it is the point at which theory can do nothing. That does not necessarily make of theory a failure. The real is actually a challenge to the theoretical edifice. But in 'my opinion theory can have no status other than that of chal lenging the real. At that point, theory is no longer theory, it is the event itself There is no "reality" with respect to which theory could 1 1 6 / Forget Baudri l lard become dissident or heretical, pursuing its fate other than in the obj ectivity of things. Rather, it's the objectivity of things we must question. What is this objectivity? In the so-called "real world," don't things always happen that way? By a divergence, a trajectory, It a curve which is not at all the linear curve of evolution? We could perhaps develop a model of drifting plates, to speak in seismic terms, in the theory of catastrophes. The seismic is our form of the slipping and sliding of the referential. The end of the infrastruc ture. Nothing remains but shifting movements that provoke very powerful raw events. We no longer take events as revolutions or effects of the superstructure, but as underground effects of skid ding, fractal zones in which things happen. Between the plates, continents do not quite fit together, they slip under and over each other. There is no more system of reference to tell us what hap pened to the geography of things. We can only take a geoseismic view. Perhaps this is also true in the construction of a society, a mentality, a value-system. Things no longer meet head-on; they slip past one another. Everyone claims to "be in reality." But the test of reality is not decisive. Nothing happens in the real. Is anything happening in the theory then? Theory dismantles the reality principle; it's not at all a means of objectivizing things in order to transform them. No, I don't believe that. At a certain point I felt-if we suppose that the real, and social practices, are indeed there-that I was launched on a trajectory that was increasingly diverging, becoming asymptotic. It would be an error to constantly try to catch hold of that zig-zagging line of real ity. The only thing you can do is let it run all the way to the end. At that point, they can raise any objection they like about the relation Baudrillard / Lotringer / 1 1 7 to reality: we are in a totally arbitrary situation, but there is an unde niable internal necessity. From that point on, theory maintains absolutely no relation with anything at all; it becomes an event in and of itselE We can no longer fix the way things are going. I wonder if there isn't a kind of "skidding" endemic to theory. When theory manages to complete itself, following its internal logic, that's when it disappears. Its accomplishment is its abolition. Yes, I really believe that's true. Can theory (I'm speaking here about what I've done) produce, not a model, but a utopian, metaphorical representation of an event, even as its entire cyclical trajectory is being accomplished, completed? I think there is a destiny of the ory. There is a curve we can't escape. You know that my way is to make ideas appear, but as soon as they appear I immediately try to make them disappear. That's what the game has always consisted oE Strictly speaking, nothing remains but a sense of dizziness, with which you can't do anything. Isn't that a little bit suicidal? It's suicidal, but in a good way. If this game didn't exist, there would be no pleasure in writing, or in theorizing. Theory, or the pleasure ofdisappearing. . . There is an art of disappearing, a way of modulating it and making it into a state of grace. This is what I'm trying to master in theory. It's the end of theory, at least in Canetti's sense. 1 1 8 / Forget Baudrillard Yes, in that sense. Theory implodes. It's possible that theory will implode, that it will absorb its own meaning, that it will end up at best mastering its disappearance. But it doesn't happen like that. We must manage to choke back the meanings we produce-which always tend to be produced. If a the ory-or a poem, or any other kind of writing (it's not endemic to theory)-indeed manages to implode, to constitute a concentric vortex of implosion, then there are no other effects of meaning. Theory has an immediate effect-a very material one as well-of being a void. It's not so easy to create a void. And besides, there's catastrophe all around it. I don't see how theory and reality can go together. Can we implode in the real with charm? Without going all the way to suicide, we continually play on the process of disap pearance in our relations to others. Not by making ourselves scarce, but by challenging the other to make us reappear. That's what seduction is, in the good sense. Not a process of expansion and conquest, but the implosive process of the game. You theorize the way others go to a casino. It's your gambling side; you swoop down on a theoretical object-Foucault, for example-with a cold passion and you totally disconnect it from its own thrust. . . There has to be some pleasure at stake, of course, which is neither the pleasure of prophecy nor, I think, of annihilation (destruction for destruction's sake) . A perverse pleasure, in short. Theory must be played the way we said gambling was before. Baudrillard 1 Lotrin 18r 1 1 1 9 The secret ofgambling is that money doesn't exist. Does theory have a secret too? The secret of theory is that truth doesn't exist. You can't confront it in any way. The only thing you can do is play with some kind of provocative logic. Truth constitutes a space that can no longer be occupied. The whole strategy is, indeed, not to occupy it, but to work around it so that others come to occupy it. It means creating a void so that others will fall into it. If theory can no longer occupy anything;l can it at least constitute a challenge to the system to bring about its own annihilation? I have my doubts about its capacities in that respect. Those in power manage it much better than we could. The French socialists were wiped out because they couldn't see the malice of the social, which the Jesuits know so well. They should have had a more sporting idea of struggle: the slipperiness of forms. By trying to establish stability the socialists lost every time. They were always completely out of step with their system of cultural projection. The ground they fell on was quicksand. So what else could they do? What position can theory hold when it comes to thinking up events of that order? In concrete terms, I can't see any. Except per haps in the twisting in which systems, in the simulated references they latch onto (the masses, the media) , end up turning on them selves without intending to, and skidding. To me this seems pure genius, in the evil sense. It's a hypothesis, but a rather effective one. Theory can anticipate or hasten the catastrophic aspect of things. 1 20 / F(x Jet Baudri l lard We could say that theory is ahead of the state of things, that it moves too fast and thus is in a position of destiny with respect to what could happen. In reality, things happen in such a way that they are always absolutely ahead of us, as Rilke said. We're always late, and therefore they are always unpredictable. No matter how, things are always much further along than theory simply by virtue of the fact that the use of discourse is in the domain of metaphor. We can't escape it. In language we are condemned to using ambiguous extrapolations. If we claim a truth, we push effects of meaning to the extreme within a model. All that theory can do is be rigorous enough to cut itself off from any system of reference, so that it will at least be current, on the scale of what it wishes to describe. Youve cut yourself offfrom every system of reference  but not from referentiality. What I see you describing is not a challenge to the real, but a challenge internal to theory. You don t criticize the genealogical attitude or the libidinal position, you send them spinning away like tops. You wholly embrace the movement that animates them, you amplify their concepts to the maximum  pulling them into the vortex ofyour own dizziness. You draw them into an endless spiral which, like the treatment of myths by Levi-Strauss, leads them bit by bit to their own exhaustion. That's right. Thus theory is exterminated. It no longer has any term, literally. You can't find an end for it anymore. That's one mode of disappearance. By pushing theory to its limit the way you do, you are hyper-realizing it. You take away from theory its substance, to exhaust it, to extenuate Baudrillard / Lotringer / 1 2 1 it in its form, and then you "forget it" as a body in suspension might be left behind. You don't even simulate the real, you play God's advo cate, the evil genius of theory. More Foucauldian than Foucault, you evaporate his microphysics; more schizo than Deleuze and Guattari, you straddle their fluxes, denying them any resting point. You are not the metaphysician you would like people to take you for; you are a metatheoretician. A simulator of theory. No wonder theoreticians accuse you ofbeing an agentprovocateur. You aren't theoretical you are 'worse. " You put theory into a state ofgrace into which you dare the world to follow you. Theory is simulation. At least that is the usage of it I have. Both simulation and challenge. It isn't deliberate. It started that way, that's all. I don't want to give it a general form. You catch concepts in their own trap-that is, in yours-abolishing every certainty by dint offidelity. That is the position ofhumor, which can be sad, as well as tongue-in-cheek. You adopt the imperceptible insolence ofthe servant challenging his master (his intellectual masters) to take him seriously. Calling your bluffwould mean getting entangled in your game. But to evade your challenge still amounts to lending you a hand. You "forget" those whom you vampirize, but you never allow yourself to be forgotten. You are like the media, about which one can say nothing without oneself becoming implicated in it. What allows you to understand it so well is thatyou are included in it. You are both playing the same game. You both use the same strategy. You don't speak about the media, the media speaks through you. As soon as you turn on your theoretical screen, the great myths ofhistory are turned into a soap opera, or into "serials. You make them share the fate of that TV pro gram, "Holocaust, " which you analyzed so well. 19 1 22 I FOtl 8t Baudrillard I don't deny history. It's an immense toy. Yes, ifyou remain glued to the screen, or fascinated by the giddiness of . commutatzons. Our anti-destiny is the media universe. And I don't see how to make this mental leap which would make it possible to reach the fractal or fatal zones where things would really be happening. Collectively we are behind the radio-active screen of information. It is no more possible to go behind that curtain than it is to leap over your own shadow. You are one of the few thinkers to confront the Gorgon of the media from within, to extractfrom it a vision-at the risk ofbeing paralyzed. Yet you, too, need an adversary to succumb to your own fascination. And that partner can't be the media since you are yourself behind the screen; nor can it be reality, which you have leftfar behind. That part ner is theory. Cultivating paradox in order to revulse theory, to upset its vision, to bring it to a crisis by playing and displaying the card of its own seriousness. That, I believe, is what your pleasure is, the only one maybe, or the only socializable one, at any rate a pleasure that is as strong as fascination. I admit that I greatly enjoy provoking that revulsion. But right away people ask, "What can you do with that?" It relies after all on an extraordinary deception-in the literal sense of the term. There is nothing to be had from it.  1 Jean Baudrillard electricity of the social and political and neu- tralise it forever. They are neither good conduc- tors of the political, nor good conductors of the social, nor good conductors of meaning in general. Everything flows through them, every- thing magnetises them, but diffuses throughout them without leaving a trace. And, ultimately, the appeal to the masses has always .gone unanswered. They do not radiate; on the con- trary, they absorb all radiation from the outlying constellations of State, History, Culture, Mean- ing. They are inertia, the strength of inertia, the strength of the neutral. In this seme, the mass is characteristic of our modernity, as a highly implosive phenomenon, ir- reducible for any traditional theory and practice, even perhaps for any theory and practice at all. According to their imaginary representa- tion, the masses drift somewhere between passiv ity and wild spontaneity, but always as a poten- tial energy, a reservoir of the social and of social energy; today a mute referent, tomorrow, when they speak up and cease to be the "silent majority," a protagonist of history - now, in fact, the masses have no history to write, neither 2 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities past nor future, they have no virtual energies to release, nor any desire to fulfill: their strength is actual, in the present, and sufficient unto itself. It consists in their silence, in their capacity to ab- sorb and neutralise, already superior to any power acting upon them. It is a specific inertial strength, whose effectivity differs from that of all those schemas of production, radiation and ex- pansion according to which our imaginary func- tions, even in its wish to destroy those same schemas. An unacceptable and unintelligible figure of implosion (is this still a "process"?) - stumbling block to all our systems of meaning, against which they summon all their resistance, and screening, with a renewed outbreak of signi- fication, with a blaze of signifiers, the central col- lapse of meaning. The social void is scattered with interstitial objects and crystalline clusters which spin around and coalesce in a cerebral chiaroscuro. So is the mass, an in vacuo aggregation of in- dividual particles, refuse of the social and of media impulses: an opaque nebula whose 3 Jean Baudrillard growing density absorbs all the surrounding energy and light rays, to collapse finally under its own weight. A black hole which engulfs the social. This is, therefore, exactly the reverse of a "sociological" understanding. Sociology can only depict the expansion of the social and its vicissitudes. It survives only on the positive and definitive hypothesis of the social. The reab- sorption, the implosion of the social escapes it. The hypothesis of the death of the social is also that of its own death. The term "mass" is not a concept. ~t is a leitmotif of political demagogy, a soft, sticky, lumpenanalytical notion. A good sociology would attempt to surpass it with "more subtle" categories: socio-professional ones, categories of class, cultural status, etc. Wrong: it is by prowling around these soft and acritical no- tions (like "mana" once was) that one can go further than intelligent critical sociology. Besides, it will be noticed retrospectively that the concepts "class," "social relations," "power," "status," "institution" - and "social" itself - all those too explicit concepts which are the glory of the legitimate sciences, have also 4 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities only ever been muddled notions themselves, but notions upon which agreement has never- theless been reached for mysterious ends: those of preserving a certain code of analysis. To want to specify the term "mass" is a mistake - it is to provide meaning for that which has none. One says: "the mass of workers." But the mass is never that of the workers, nor of any other social subject or object. The "peasant masses" of old were not in fact masses: only those form a mass who are freed from their symbolic bondage, "released" (only to be caught in infinite "networks") and destined to be no more than the innumerable end points of precisely those same theoretical models which do not succeed in in- tegrating them and which finally only produce them as statistical refuse. The mass is without at- tribute, predicate, quality, reference. This is its difinition, or its radical lack of definition. It has no sociological "reality." It has nothing to do with any real population, body or specific social aggregate. Any attempt to qualify it only seeks to transfer it back to sociology and rescue it from 5 Jean Baudrillard this indistinctness which is not even that of equivalence (the unlimited sum of equivalent in- dividuals: 1 +1 +1 - such is the sociological definition), but that of the neutral, that is to say neither one nor the other (ne-uter). There is no longer any polarity between the one and the other in the mass. This is what causes that vacuum and inwardly collapsing effect in all those systems which survive on the separation and distinction of poles (two, or many in more complex systems). This is what makes the cir- culation of meaning within the mass impossible: it is instantaneously dispersed, like atoms in a void. This is also what makes it impossible for the mass to be alienated, since neither the one nor the other exist there any longer. A speechless mass for every hollow spokes- man without a past. Admirable conjunction, be- tween those who have nothing to say, and the masses, who do not speak. Ominous emptines.s of all discourse. No hysteria or potential fascism, but simulation by precipitation of every lost referential. Black box of every referential, of every uncaptured meaning, of impossible his- tory, of untraceable systems of representation, the mass is what remains when the social has been 6 In the Shadow of the Si lent Majorities completely removed. Regarding the impossibility of making meaning circulate among the masses, the best ex- ample is God. The masses have hardly retained anything but the image of him, never the Idea. They have never been affected by the Idea of God, which has remained a matter for the clergy, nor by anguish over sin and personal salvation. What they have retained is the enchantment of saints and martyrs; the last judgment; the Dance of Death; sorcery; the ceremony and spectacle of the Church; the immanence of ritual - the con- trast to the transcendence of the Idea. They were and have remained pagans, in their way, never haunted by the Supreme Authority, but surviv- ing on the small change of images, superstition and the devil. Degraded practices with regard to the spiritual wager of faith? Indeed. It is their par- ticular way, through the banality of rituals and profane simulacra, of refusing the categorical im- perative of morality and faith, the sublime im- perative of meaning, which they have always re- 7 Jean Baudrillard jected. It isn't that they have not been able to at- tain the higher enlightenment of religion: they have ignored it. They don't refuse to die for a faith, for a cause, for an idol. What they refuse is trans<;endence; the uncertainty, the difference, the waiting, the asceticism which constitute the sublime exaction of religion. For the masses, the Kingdom of God has always been already here on earth, in the pagan immanence of images, in the spectacle of it presented by the Church. Fan- tastic distortion of the religious prin£:iple. The masses have absorbed religion by their sorcerous and spectacular manner of practising it. All the great schemas of reason have suf- fered the same fate. They have only traced their trajectory, they have only followed the thread of their history along the thin edge of the social stratum bearing meaning (and in particular of the stratum bearing social meaning), and on the whole they have only penetrated into the masses at the cost of their misappropriation, of their radical distortion. So it was with Historical Reason,. Political Reason, Cultural Reason, Revolutionary Reason - so even with the very Reason of the Social, the most interesting since this seems inherent to the masses, and appears to 8 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities have produced them throughout its evolution. Are the masses the "mirror of the social"? No, they don't reflect the social, nor are they reflected in the social - it is the mirror of the social which shatters to pieces on them. Even this image is not right, since it still evokes the idea of a hard substance, of an opaque resistance. Rather, the masses function as a gigantic black hole which inexorably inflects, bends and distorts all energy and light radiation approaching it: an implosive sphere, in which the curvature of spaces accelerates, in which all dimensions curve back on themselves and "in- volve" to the point of annihilation, leaving in their stead only a sphere of potential engulfment. The Abyss of Meaning So it is with information. Whatever its political, pedagogical, cultural content, the plan is always to get some meaning across, to keep the masses within reason; an im- perative to produce meaning that takes the form of the constantly repeated imperative to moralise 9 Jean Baudrillard information: to better inform, to better socialise, to raise the cultural level of the masses, etc. Nonsense: the masses scandalously resist this im- perative of rational communication. They are given meaning: they want spectacle. No effort has been able to convert them to the seriousness of the content, nor even to the seriousness of the code. Messages are given to them, they only want some sign, they idolise the play of signs and stereotypes, they idolise any content so long as it resolves itself into a spectacular sequence. What they reject is the "dialectic" of meaning. Nor is anything served by alleging that they are mystified. This is always a hypocritical hypoth- esis which protects the intellectual complaisance of the producers of meaning: the masses spon- taneously aspire to the natural light of reason. This in order to evade the reverse hypothesis, namely that it is in complete "freedom". that the masses oppose their refusal of meaning and their will to spectacle to the ultimatum of meaning. They distrust, as with death, this transparency and this'political will. They scent the simplifying terror which is behind the ideal hegemony of meaning, and they react in their own way, by reducing all articulate discourse to a single irra- 10 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities tional and baseless dimension, where signs lose their meaning and peter out in fascination: the spectacular. Once again, it is not a question of mystifica- tion: it is a question of their own exigencies, of an explicit and positive counter-strategy - the task of absorbing and annihilating culture, know- ledge, power, the social. An immemorial task, but one which assumes its full scope today. A deep antagonism which forces the inversion of received scenarios: it is no longer meaning which would be the ideal line of force in our societies, that which eludes it being only waste intended for reabsorption some time or other - on the con- trary, it is meaning which is only an ambiguous and inconsequential accident, an effect due to ideal convergence of a perspective space at any given moment (History, Power, etc.) and which, moreover, has only ever really concerned a tiny fraction and superficial layer of our "societies." And this is true of individuals also: we are only episodic conductors of meaning, for in the main, and profoundly, we form a mass, living most of the time in panic or haphazardly, above and beyond any meaning. Now, with this inverse hypothesis, every- 11 Jean Baudrillard thing changes. Take one example from a thousand concern- ing this contempt for meaning, the folklore of silent passivities. On the night of Klaus Croissant's extradi- tion, the TV transmitted a football match in which France played to qualify for the world cup. Some hundreds of people demonstrated outside la Sante, a few barristers ran to and fro in the night; twenty million people spent their evening glued to the screen. An explosion of popular joy when France won. Consternation and indigna- tion of the illuminati over this scandalous indif- ference. La Monde: "9 pm. At that time the Ger- man barrister had already been taken out of la Sante. A few minutes later, Rocheteau scored the first goal." Melodrama of indignation.1 Not a single query about the mystery of this indif- ference. One same reason is always invoked: the manipulation of the masses by power, their mystification by football. In any case, this indif- ference ought not to be, hence it has nothing to 12 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities tell us. In other words, the "silent majority" is even stripped of its indifference, it has no right even that this be recognised and imputed to it, even this apathy must have been imposed on it by power. What contempt behind this interpretation! Mystif·ied, the masses are not allowed their own behavior. Occasionally, they are conceded a revolutionary spontaneity by which they glimpse the "rationality of their own desire," that yes, but God protect us from' their silence and their iner- tia. It is exactly this indifference, however, that demands to be analysed in its positive brutality, instead of being dismissed as white magic, or as a magic alienation which always turns the multi- tudes away from their revolutionary vocation. Moreover, how does it succeed in turning them away? Can one ask questions about the strange fact that, after several revolutions and a century or two of political apprenticeship, in spite of the newspapers, the trade unions, the par- ties, the intellectuals and all the energy put into educating and mobilising the people, there are still (and it will be exactly the same in ten or twen- ty years) a thousand persons who stand up and twenty million who remain "passive" - and not 13 Jean Baudrillard only passive, but who, in all good faith and with glee and without even asking themselves why, frankly prefer a football match to a human and political drama? It is curious that this proven fact has never succeeded in making political analysis shift ground, but on the contrary reinforces it in its vision of an omnipotent, manipulatory power, and a mass prostrate in an unintelligible coma. Now none of this is true, and both the above are a deception: power manipulates nothing, the masses are neither mislead nor mystified. Power is only too happy to make foot- ball bear a facile responsibility, even to take upon itself the diabolical responsibility for stupefying the masses. This comforts it in its illusion of being power, and leads away from the much more dangerous fact that this indifference of the masses is their true, their only practice, that there is no other ideal of them to imagine, nothing in this to deplore, but everything to analyse as the brute fact of a collective retaliation and of a refusal to participate in the recommended ideals, however enlightened. 14 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities What is at stake in the masses lies elsewhere. We might as well take note and recognise that any hope of revolution, the whole promise of the social and of social change has only been able to function up till now thanks to this dodging of the issue, this fantastic denial. We might as well begin again, as Freud did in the psychic order,2 from this remainder, from this blind sediment, from this waste or refuse of meaning, from this un analysed and perhaps unanaly.sable fact (there is a good reason why such a Copernican Revolu- tion has never been undertaken in the political universe: it is the whole political order that is in danger of paying the price). Rise and Fall of the Political The political and the social seem inseparable to us, twin constellations, since at least the French Revolution, under the sign (determinant or not) of the economic. But for us today, this un- doubtedly is only true of their simultaneous decline. 15 Jean Baudrillard When the political emerged during the Renaissance from the religious and ecclesiastic spheres, to win reknown with Machiavelli, it was at first only a pure game of signs, a pure strategy which was not burdened with any social or his- torical "truth," but, on the contrary, played on the absence of truth (as did later the worldly strategy of the Jesuits on the absence of God). To begin with, the political space belonged to the same order as that of Renaissance mechanical theatre, or of perspective space in painting, which were invented at the same time. Its form was that of a game, not of a system of representa- tion - semiurgy and strategy, not ideology - its function was one of virtuosity, not of truth (hence the game, subtle and a corollary to this, of Balthazar Gracian in Homme de Cour). The cynicism and immorality of Machiavellian poli- tics lay there: not as the vulgar understanding has it in the unscrupulous usage of means, but in the offhand disregard for ends. Now, as Nietzsche well knew, it is in this disregard for a social, psychological, historical truth, in this exercise of simulacra as such, that the maximum of political energy is found, where the political is a game and is not yet given a reason. 16 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities It is since the eighteenth century, and par- ticularly since the Revolution, that the political has taken a decisive turn. It took upon itself a social· reference, the social invested it. At the same time, it entered into representation, its per- formance became dominated by representative mechanisms (theatre pursued a parallel fate: it became a representative theatre - likewise for perspective space: machinery at the start, it became the place where a truth of space and of representation was inscribed). The political scene became that of the evocation of a fundamental signified: the people, the will of the people, etc. It no longer worked on signs alone, but on mean- ing; henceforth summoned to best signify the real it expressed, summoned to become transparent, to moralise itself and to respond to the social ideal of good representation. For a long time, never- theless, a balance carne into play between the proper sphere of the political and the forces reflected in it: the social, the historical, the economic. Undoubtedly this balance corres- ponds to the golden age of bourgeois represen- 17 Jean 8audrillard tative systems (constitutionality: eighteenth- century England, the United States of America, the France of bourgeois revolutions, the Europe of 1848). It is with marxist thought, in its successive developments, that the end of the political and of its particular energy was inaugurated. Here began the absolute hegemony of the social and the economic, and the compulsion, on the part of the political, to become the legislative, institu- tional, executive mirror of the social. The auton- omy of the political was inversely proportional to the growing hegemony of the social. Liberal thought always thrives on a kind of nostalgic dialectic between the two, but socialist thought, revolutionary thought openly postu- lates a dissolution of the political at some point in history, in the final transparency of the social. The social won. But, at this point of general- isation, of saturation, where it is no more than the zero degree of the political, at this point of ab- solute reference, of omnipresence and diffraction in all the interstices of physical and mental space, what becomes of the social itself? It is the sign of its end: the energy of the social is reversed, its 18 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities specificity is lost, its historIcal quality and its ideality vanish in favour of a configuration where not only the political. becomes volatilised, but where the social itself no longer has any name. Anonymous. THE MASS. THE MASSES. The Silent Majority The dwindling of the political from a pure strategic arrangement to a system of represen- tation, then to the present scenario of neo- figuration, where the system continues under the same manifold signs but where these no longer represent anything and no longer have their "equivalent" in a "reality" or a real social substance: there is no longer any political in- vestiture because there is no longer even any social referent of the classical kind (a people, a class, a proletariat, objective conditions) to lend force to effective political signs. Quite simply, there is no longer any social signified to give force to a political signifier. The only referent which still functions is that of the silent majority. All contemporary 19 Jean Baudrillard systems function on this nebulous entity, on this floating substance whose existence is no longer social, but statistical, and whose only mode of appearance is that of the survey. A simulation on the horizon of the social, or rather on whose horizon the social has already disappeared. That the silent majority (or the masses) is an imaginary referent does not mean they don't ex- ist. It means that their representation is no longer possible. The masses are no longer a referent because they no longer belong to the order of representation. They don't express them~elves, they are surveyed. They don't reflect upon themselves, they are tested. The referendum (and the media are a constant referendum of directed questions and answers) has been substituted for the political referent. Now polls, tests, the referendum, media are devices which no longer belong to a dimension of representations, but to one of simulation. They no longer have a referent in view, but a model. Here, revolution in relation to the devices of classical sociality (of which elec- tions, institutions, the instances of representa- tion, and even of repression, still form a part) is complete: in all this, social meaning still flows 20 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities between one pole and another, in a dialectical structure which allows for a political stake and contradictions. Everything changes with the device of simu- lation. In the couple "silent majority / survey" for example, there is no longer any pole nor any dif- ferential term, hence no electricity of the social either: it is short-circuited by the confusing of poles, in a total circularity of signalling (exactly as is the case with molecular communication and with the substance it informs in DNA and the genetic code). This is the ideal form of simula- tion: collapse of poles, orbital circulation of models (this is also the matrix of every implosive process). Bombarded with stimuli, messages and tests, the masses are simply an opaque, blind stratum, like those clusters of stellar gas known only through analysis of their light spectrum - radiation spectrum equivalent to statistics and surveys - but precisely: it can no longer be a question of expression or representation, but only of the simulation of an ever inexpressible and unexpressed social. This is the meaning of 21 Jean Baudrillard their silence. But this silence is paradoxical - it isn't a silence which does not speak, it is a silence which refuses to be spoken for in its name. And in this sense, far from being a form of alienation, it is an absolute weapon. No one can be said to represent the silent ma- jority, and that is its revenge. The masses are no longer an authority to which one might refer as one formerly referred to class or to the people. Withdrawn into their silence, they are no longer (a) subject (especially not to - or of - history), hence they can no longer be spoken for, articu- lated, represented, nor pass through the political "mirror stage" and the cycle of imaginary iden- tifications. One sees what strength results from this: no longer being (a) subject, they can no longer be alienated - neither in their own language (they have none), nor in any other which would pretend to speak for them. The end of revolutionary convictions. For these have always speculated on the possibility of the masses, or the proletariat, denying themselves as such. But the mass is not a place of negativity or explosion, it is a place of absorption and implosion. Inaccessible to schemas of liberation, revolu- tion and historicity; this is its mode of defense, its 22 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities particular mode of retaliation. Model of simula- tion and imaginary referent for use by a phantom political class which now no longer knows what kind of "power" it wields over it, the mass is at the same time the death, the end of this political proc- ess thought to rule over it. And into it is engulfed the political as will and representation. The strategy of power has long seemed founded on the apathy of the masses. The more passive they were, the more secure it was. But this logic is only characteristic of the bureaucratic and centralist phase of power. And it is this which to- day turns against it: the inertia it has fostered be- comes the sign of its own death. That is why it seeks to reverse its strategies: from passivity to participation, from silence to speech. But it is too late. The threshold of the "critical mass," that of the involution of the social through inertia, is exceeded. 3 Everywhere the masses are encouraged to speak, they are urged to live socially, electorally, organisationally, sexually, in participation, in festival, in free speech, etc. The spectre must be exorcised, it must pronounce its name. Nothing shows more dramatically that the only genuine problem today is the silence of the mass, the 23 Jean Baudrillard silence of the silent majority. All reserves are exhausted in maintaining this mass in controlled emulsion and in prevent- ing it from falling back into its panic-inducing in- ertia and its silence. No longer being under the reign of will or representation, it falls under the province of diagnosis, or divination pure and simple - whence the universal reign of informa- tion and statistics: we must ausculate it, sound it out, unearth some oracle from within it. Whence the mania for seduction, solicitude and all the solicitation surrounding it. Whence prediction by resonance, the effects of forecasting and of an il- lusory mass outlook: "The French people think ... The majority of Germans disapprove ... All England thrilled to the birth of the Prince ... etc." - a mirror held out for an ever blind, ever absent recognition. Whence that bombardment of signs which the mass is thought to re-echo. It is interrogated by converging waves, by light or linguistic stimuli, exactly like distant stars or nuclei bom- barded with particles in a cyclotron. Information is exactly this. Not a mode of communication or 24 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities of meaning, but a mode of constant emulsion, of input-output and of controlled chain reactions, exactly as in atomic simulation chambers. We must free the "energy" of the mass in order to fabricate the" social." But it is a contradictory process, for infor- mation and security, in all their forms, instead of intensifying or creating the "social relation," are on the contrary entropic processes, modalities of the end of the social. It is thought that the masses may be struc- tured by injecting them with information, their captive social energy is believed to be released by means of information and messages (today i"t is no longer the institutional grid as such, rather it is the quantity of information and the degree of media exposure which measures socialisation). Quite the contrary. Instead of transforming the mass into energy, information produces even more mass. Instead of informing as it claims, in- stead of giving form and structure, information neutralises even further the "social field"; more and more it creates an inert mass impermeable to the classical institutions of the social, and to the very contents of information. Today, replacing the fission of symbolic structures by the social 25 Jean Baudrillard and its rational violence, is the fission of the social itself by the "irrational" violence of media and in- formation - the final result being precisely an atomised, nuclearised, molecularised mass, the result of two centuries of accelerated socialisation and which brings it irremediably to an end. The mass is only mass because its social energy has already frozen. It is a cold reservoir, capable of absorbing and neutralising any hot energy. It resembles those half-dead systems into which more energy is injected than is withdrawn, those paid-out deposits exorbitantly maintained in a state of artificial exploitation. Immense energy is expended in mitigating the tendentially declining rate of political invest- ment and the absolute fragility of the social prin- ciple of reality, in maintaining this simulation of the social and in preventing it from totally im- ploding. And the system risks being swallowed up by it. Basically, what goes for commodities also goes for meaning. For a long time capital only 26 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities had to produce goods; consumption ran by itself. Today it is necessary to produce consumers, to produce demand, and this production is infinitely more costly than that of goods (for the most part, and above all since 1929, the social arose out of this crisis of demand: the production of demand largely overlaps the production of the social itself). 4 For a long time it was enough for power to produce meaning (political, ideological, cultural, sexual), and the demand followed; it absorbed supply and still surpassed it. Meaning was in short supply, and all the revolutionaries offered themselves to produce still more. Today, everything has changed: no longer is meaning in short supply, it is produced everywhere, in ever increasing quantities - it is demand which is weakening. And it is the production of this de- mand for meaning which has become crucial for the system. Without this demand for, without this susceptibility to, without this minimal par- ticipation in meaning, power is nothing but an empty simulacrum and an isolated effect of perspective. Here, too, the production of demand is infinitely more costly than the production of meaning itself. Beyond a certain point, it is im- possible, all the energy mustered by the system 27 Jean Baudrillard will no longer be enough. The demand for objects and for services can always be artificially pro- duced, at a high, but accessible cost; the system has proved this. The desire for meaning, when it is in short supply, and the desire for reality, when it is weakening everywhere, cannot be made good and together threaten total ruin. The mass absorbs all the social energy, but no longer refracts it. It absorbs every sign and every meaning, but no longer reflects them. It ab- sorbs all messages and digests them. For every question put to it, it sends back a tautological and circular response. 5 It never participates. Inun- dated by flows and tests, it forms a mass or earth; it is happy to be a good conductor of flows, but of any flow, a good conductor of information, but of any information, a good conductor of norms, but of any norm, and thereby to reflect the social in its absolute transparency, to give place only to the effects of power and of the social, the latter like constellations fluctuating around this im- perceptible nucleus. The mass is dumb like beasts, and its silence is equal to the silence of beasts. Despite having been surveyed to death (and the constant solicita- tion, the information, to which it is submitted is 28 In the Shadow of the Si lent Majorities equivalent to experimental torture on laboratory animals), it says neither whether the truth is to the left or to the right, nor whether it prefers revolution or repression. It is without truth and without reason. It has been attributed with every arbitrary remark. It is without conscience and without unconscious. This silence is unbearable. It is the unknown of the political equation, the unknown which an- nuls every political equation. Everybody ques- tions it, but never as silence, always to make it speak. But the inertial strength of the masses is unfathomable: literally, no "sounding" or survey will cause it to become evident, since their effect is to blanket it out. A silence which topples the political and the social into the hyperreality with which we associate it. For if the political seeks to "pick up" the masses in a social echo or simula- tion chamber (the media, information), it is the masses who in return become a huge echo or simulation chamber of the social. Manipulation has never existed. The game is played on both sides, with the same weapons, and who can say which is winning today: the simulation power 29 Jean 8audrillard performs on the masses, or the inverse simulation held out by the masses for power to be swallowed up in. Neither Subject Nor Object The mass realises that paradox of being both an object of simulation (it only exists at the point of convergence of all the media waves which depict it) and a subject of simulation, capable of refracting all the models and of emulating them by hypersimulation (its hyperconformity, an im- manent form of humour). The mass realises that paradox of not being a subject, a group-subject, but of not being an ob- ject either. Every effort to make a subject of it (real or mythical) runs head on into the glaring impossibility of an autonomous change in con- sciousness. Every effort to make an object of it, to treat and analyse it as brute matter, according to objective laws, runs head on into the contrary fact that it is impossible to manipulate the masses in any determinate way, or to understand them in terms of elements, relations, structures and wholes. All manipulation plunges, gets sucked into the mass, absorbed, distorted, reversibilised. 30 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities It is impossible to know where it goes; most likely it goes round and round in an endless cycle, foil- ing every intention on the part of the manipu- lators. No analysis would know how to contain this diffuse, decentered, Brownian, molecular reality: the notion of object vanishes just as "mat- ter," in the ultimate analysis, vanishes on the horizon of microphysics - it is impossible to comprehend the latter as object once that in- finitesimal point is reached where the subject of observation is himself annulled. No more object of knowledge, no more subject of knowledge. The mass brings about the same insoluble boundary situation in the field of the "social". No longer is it objectifiable (in political terms: no longer is it representable), and it annuls any sub- ject who would claim to comprehend it (in political terms: it annuls anybody who would claim to represent it). Only surveys and statistics (like the law of large numbers and the calculus of probabilities in mathematical physics) can ac- count for it, but one knows that this incantation, this meteoric ritual of statistics and surveys has 31 Jean Baudrillard no real object, especially not the masses whom it is thought to express. It simply simulates an elusive object, but whose absence is nevertheless intolerable. It "produces" it in the form of an- ticipated responses, of circular signals which seem to circumscribe its existence and to bear witness to its will. Floating signs - such are surveys - instantaneous signs, intended for manipulation, and whose conclusions can be in- terchanged. Everybody knows the profound indeterminateness which rules over statistics (the calculus of probabilities or large numbers also correspond to an indeterminateness themselves, to a "Plimsollline" of the concept of matter, to which again hardly any notion of "objective law" corresponds) . Besides, it is not certain that the procedures of scientific experimentation in the so-called exact sciences have much more truthfulness than surveys and statistics. In any discipline what- soever, the coded, controlled, "objective" form of inquiry only allows for this circular type of truth, from which the very object aimed at is excluded. In any case, it is possible to think that the uncer- tainty surrounding this enterprise of the objective determination of the world remains total and that 32 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities even matter and the inanimate, when summoned to respond, in the various sciences of nature, in the same terms and according to the same pro- cedures as the masses and "social" beings in statistics and surveys, also send back the same conforming signals, the same coded responses, with the same exasperating, endless conformity, only to better escape, in the last instance, exactly like the masses, any definition as object. There would thus be a fantastic irony about "matter," and every object of science, just as there is a fantastic irony about the masses in their muteness, or in their statistical discourse so con- forming to the questions put to them, akin to the eternal irony of feminity of which Hegel speaks - the irony of a false fidelity, of an excessive fidelity to the law, an ultimately impenetrable simulation of passivity and obedience, and which annuls in return the law governing them, in ac- cordance with the immortal example of Soldier Schweik. From this would follow, in the literal sense, a pataphysics or science of imaginary solutions, a science of the simulation or hypersimulation of 33 Jean 8audrillard an exact, true, objective world, with its universal laws, including the delirium of those who inter- pret it according to these laws. The masses and their involuntary humor would introduce us to a pataphysics of the social which ultimately would relieve us of all that cumbersome metaphysics of the social. This contradicts all received views of the process of truth, but perhaps the latter is only an illusion of judgment. The scientist cannot believe that matter, or living beings, do not respond "ob- jectively" to the questions he puts, or that they respond to them too objectively for his questions to be sound. This hypothesis alone seems absurd and unthinkable to him. He will never accept it. He will never leave the enchanted and simulated circle of his enquiry. The same hypothesis applies everywhere, the same axiom of credibility. The adman cannot but believe that people believe in it - however, slightly, that is, that a minimal probability exists of the message reaching its goal and being de- coded according to its meaning. Any principle of uncertainty is excluded. If it turned out that the refractive index of this message in the recipient were nil, advertising would instantly collapse. It 34 In the Shadow of the Si lent Majorities only surveys on that belief which it accords itself (this is the same wager as that of science about the objectivity of the world) and which it doesn't try too hard to verify, in terror that the contrary hypothesis might also be true, namely that the great majority of advertising messages never reach their destination, that the viewing public no longer differentiates between the contents, which are refracted in the void. The medium alone functions as an atmospheric effect and acts as spectacle and fascination. THE MEDIUM IS THE MESSAGE, McLuhan prophesied: a for- mula characteristic of the present phase, the "cool" phase of the whole mass media culture, that of a freezing, neutralisation of every message in a vacuous ether. That of a glaciation of mean- ing. Critical thought judges and chooses, it pro- duces differences, it is by selection that it presides over meaning. The masses, on the other hand, do not choose, they do not produce differences but a lack of differentiation - they retain a fascination for the .medium which they prefer to the critical exigencies of the message. For fascination is not dependent on meaning, it is proportional to the disaffection of meaning. It is obtained by neutra- lising the message in favour of the medium, by 35 Jean Baudrillard neutralising the idea of favour of the idol, by neutral ising the truth in favour of the simula- crum. It is at this level that the media function. Fascination is their law, and their specific violence, a massive violence denying communi- cation by meaning in favour of another mode of communication. Which one? For us an untenable hypothesis: that it may be possible to communicate outside the medium of meaning, that the very intensity of com- munication may be proportional to the reabsorp- tion of meaning and to its collapse. For it is not meaning or the increase of meaning which gives tremendous pleasure, but its neutralisation which fascinates (d. Witz, the operation of wit, in L'Echange Symbolique et la Mort). And not by some death drive, which implies tnat life is still on the side of meaning, but quite simply by defiance, by an allergy to reference, to the message, to the code and to every category of the linguistic enter- prise, by a repudiation of all this in favor of im- ploding the sign in fascination (no longer any signifier or signified: absorption of the poles of signification). None of the guardians of meaning 36 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities can understand this: the whole morality of mean- ing rises up against fascination. The political sphere also only survives by a credibility hypothesis, namely that the masses are permeable to action and to discourse, that they hold an opinion, that they are present behind the surveys and statistics. It is at this price alone that the political class can still believe that it speaks and that it is politically heard. Even though the political has long been the agent of nothing but spectacle on the screen of private life. Digested as a form of entertainment, half-sports, half-games (see the winning ticket in American elections, or election evenings on radio or TV); like those old comedies of manners, at once both fascinating and ludicrous. For some time now, the electoral game has been akin to TV game shows in the consciousness of the people. The lat- ter, who have always served as alibi and as super- numerary on the political stage, avenge them- selves by treating as a theatrical performance the political scene and its actors. The people have become a public. It is the football match or film or cartoon which serve as models for their percep- tion of the political sphere. The people even enjoy day to day, like a horne movie, the fluctuations of 37 Jean 8audrillard their own opinions in the daily opinion polls. Nothing in all this engages any responsibility. At no time are the masses politically or historically engaged in a conscious manner. They have only ever done so out of perversity, in complete ir- responsibility. Nor is this a flight from politics, but rather the effect of an implacable antagonism between the class (caste?) which bears the social the political, culture-master of time and his- tory, and the un(in)formed, residual, senseless mass. The former continually seeks to perfect the reign of meaning, to invest, to saturate the field of the social, the other continually distorts every ef- fect of meaning, neutralises or diminishes them. In this confrontation, the winner is not at all the one you might think. This can be seen in the shift in value from history to the humdrum, from the public sphere to the private sphere. Up till the 60's, history leads on the downbeat: the private, the ordinary is only the dark side of the political sphere. At best a dialectic plays between the two, and it is to be hoped that one day the ordinary, like the indivi- dual, will shine over history, in the universal. But 38 In the Shadow of the Si lent Majorities in the meantime, the withdrawal of the masses in- to their domestic sphere, their refuge from his- tory, politics and the universal, and their absorp- tion into an idiotic humdrum existence of con- sumption is only to be lamented (happily they work, which preserves for them an "objective" historical status, while awaiting a change in con- sciousness). Today, there is a reversal of the downbeat and the upbeat: one begins to forsee that ordinary life, men in their banality, could well not be the insignificant side of history - bet- ter: that withdrawing into the private could well be a direct defiance of the political, a form of ac- tively resisting political manipulation. The roles are reversed: it is the banality of life, everyday life, everything formerly branded as petit- bourgeois, abject and apolitical (including sex) which becomes the downbeat, with history and the political unfolding their abstract eventuality elsewhere. A staggering hypothesis. The depoliticised masses would not be this side of the political, but beyond it. The private, the unnamable, the or- dinary, the insignificant, petty wiles, petty per- versions etc., would not be this side of represen- tation, but beyond it. In their "naive" practice 39 Jean Baudrillard (and without having waited for analysis of the "end of the political"), the masses would sentence the political to annihilation, they would be spon- taneously transpolitical like they are translin- guistic in their language. But take care! Out of this private and asocial universe, which does not enter into a dialectic of representation and of transcendence towards the universal, out of this involutive sphere which is opposed to all revolution from the top and refuses to play the game, some would like to make a new source of revolutionary energy (in particular in its sexual and desire version). They would like to give it meaning and to reinstate it in its very banality, as historical negativity. Exalta- tion of micro-desires, small differences, un- conscious practices, anonymous marginalities. Final somersault of the intellectuals to exalt in- signficance, to promote non-sense into the order of sense. And to transfer it back to political reason. Banality, inertia, apoliticism used to be fascist; they are in the process of becoming revolutionary - without changing meaning, without ceasing to have meaning. Micro- revolution of banality, transpolitics of desire - one more trick of the "liberationists". The denial 40 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities of meaning has no meaning. From Resistance to Hyperconformity The emergence of silent majorities must be located within the entire cycle of historical resistance to the social. Resistance to work of course, but also resistance to medicine, resistance to schooling, resistance to security, resistance to information. Official history only records the uninterrupted progress of the social, relegating to the obscurity reserved for former cultures, as bar- barous relics, everything not coinciding with this glorious advent. In fact, contrary to what one might believe (that the social has definitely won, that its movement is irreversible, that consensus upon the social is total), resistance to the social in all its forms has progressed even more rapidly than the social. It has merely taken other forms than the primitive and violent ones which were subsequently absorbed (the social is alive and well, thank you, only idiots run away from writing and vaccination and the benefits of security). Those frontal resistances still corres- 41 Jean Baudrillard ponded to an equally frontal and violent period of socialisation, and carne from traditional groups seeking to preserve their own culture, their original cultures. It was not the mass in them which resisted, but, on the contrary, differen- tiated structures, in opposition to the homo- geneous and abstract model of the social. This type of resistance can still be discovered in the "two-step flow of communication" which American sociology has analysed: the mass does not at all constitute a passive receiving structure for media messages, whether they be political, cultural or advertising. Microgroups and in- dividuals, far from taking their cue from a uniform and imposed decoding, decode messages in their own way. They intercept them (through leaders) and transpose them (second level), con- trasting the dominant code with their own par- ticular sub-codes, finally recycling everything passing into their own cycle, exactly like primi- tive natives recycle western money in their sym- bolic circulation (the Siane of New Guinea) or like the Corsicans recycle universal suffrage and elections in their clan rivalry strategies. This ruse is universal: it is a way of redirecting, of absorb- ing, of victoriously salvaging the material dif- 42 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities fused by the dominant culture. It is this which also governs the "magic" usage of the doctor and medicine among the "underdeveloped" masses. Commonly reduced to an antiquated and irra- tional mentality, we should read in this, on the contrary, an offensive practice, a rediversion by excess, an unanalysed but conscious rejection "without knowing it" of the profound devasta- tion wreaked by rational medicine. But this is still the feat of groups traditionally structured by identity and significance. Quite dif- ferent is the refusal of socialisation which comes from the mass; from an innumerable, unnamable and anonymous group, whose strength comes from its very destructuration and inertia. Thus, in the case of the media, traditional resistance consists of reinterpreting messages according to the group's own code and for its own ends. The masses, on the contrary, accept everything and redirect everything en bloc into the spectacular, without requiring any other code, without re- quiring any meaning, ultimately without resistance, but making everything slide into an 43 Jean Baudrillard indeterminate sphere which is not even that of non-sense, but that of overall manipulation/ fascination. It has always been thought - this is the very ideology of the mass media - that it is the media which envelop the masses. The secret of manipulation has been sought in a frantic semiology of the mass media. But it has been overlooked, in this naive logic of communica- tion, that the masses are a stronger medium than all the media, that it is the former who envelop and absorb the latter - or at least there is no priority of one over the other. The mass and the media are one single process. Mass(age) is the message. So it is with movies, whose inventors initial- ly dreamed of a rational, documentary, social medium, but which very quickly and permanent- ly swung towards the imaginary. So it is with technology, science, and know- ledge. Condemned to a "magical" practice and to a "spectacular" consumption.· So it is with con- sumption itself. To their amazement, economists have never been able to rationalise consumption, the seriousness of their "theory of need" and the general consensus upon the discourse of utility 44 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities being taken for granted. But this is because the practice of the masses very quickly had nothing (or perhaps never had anything) to do with needs. They have turned consumption into a di- mension of status and prestige, of useless keeping up with the }oneses or simulation, of potlatch which surpassed use value in every way. A des- perate attempt has been made from all sides (of- ficial propaganda, consumer societies, ecologues and sociologues) to instil into them sensible spending and functional calculation in matters of consumption, but it is hopeless. For it is by sign/ value and the frantic stake in sign/value (which economists, even when they try to integrate it as a variable, have always seen as upsetting economic reason), that the masses block the economy, resist the" objective" imperative of needs and the rational balancing of behaviors and ends. Sign/ value against use value, this is already a distor- tion of political economy. And let it not be said that all this ultimately profits exchange value, that is to say the system. For if the system does well out of this game, and even encourages it (the masses "alienated" in gadgets, etc.), this isn't the main thing, and what this slipping, this skidding initiates in the long term - already initiates - is 45 Jean Baudrillard the end of the economic, cut off from all its ra- tional definitions by the excessive, magic, spec- tacular, fraudulent and nearly parodic use the masses put it to. An asocial use, resistant to all pedagogies, to all socialist education - an aber- rant use whereby the masses (us, you, every- body) have already crossed over to the other side of political economy. They haven't waited for future revolutions nor theories which claim to "liberate" them by a "dialectical" movement. They know that there is no liberation, and that a system is abolished only by pushing it mto hyperlogic, by forcing it into an excessive prac- tice which is equivalent to a brutal amortization. "Y ou want us to consume - O.K., let's consume always more, and anything whatsoever; for any useless and absurd purpose." So it is with medicine: frontal resistance (which hasn't disappeared everywhere) has been replaced by a more subtle form of subversion; an excessive, uncontrollable consumption of medicine, a panicked conformity to health in- junctions. A fantastic escalation in medical con- sumption which completely corrupts the social objectives and finalities of medicine. What better way to abolish it? At present, doctors, manipu- 46 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities lated much more than they manipulate, no longer know what they are doing, what they are. "Give us more treatment, doctors, medication, securi- ty, health - more, ever further, keep it com- ing ... !" The masses alienated in medicine? Not at all: they are in the process of ruining its institu- tion, of making Social Security explode, of put- ting the social itself in danger by craving always more of it, as with commodities. What greater mockery can there be than this craving for the social as an item of individual consumption, sub- mitted to an ever-escalating supply and demand? A parody and a paradox: it is by their very inertia in the ways of the social laid out for them that the masses go beyond its logic and its limits, and destroy its whole edifice. A destructive hyper- simulation, a destructive hyperconformity (as in the case of Beaubourg, analysed elsewhere6 ) that has all the app'earance of a victorious challenge - no one can measure the strength of this challenge, of the reversion exerted on the whole system. There lies the genuine stake today, in this underhand, inescapable confrontation between the silent majority and the social imposed on them, in this hypersimulation reduplicating simulation and exterminating it according to its 47 Jean Baudrillard own logic - not in any class struggle nor in the molecular hodge-podge of desire-breaching minorities. Mass and Terrorism We are therefore at the paradoxical point where the masses refuse the baptism of the social, which is also that of meaning and liberty. Let us not make them into a new and glorious reference. For one thing, they don't exist. But note that all power silently flounders on this silent majority, which is neither an entity nor a sociological real- ity, but the shadow cast by power, its sinking vortex, its form of absorption. A nebulous fluid, shifting, conforming, far too conforming to every solicitation and with a hyperreal conformi- ty which is the extreme form of non-participa- tion: such is the present calamity of power. Such is also the calamity of revolution. For this im- plosive mass, by definition, will never explode and every revolutionary promise will implode in- to it as well. In consequence, what is to be done with these masses? They are the leitmotif of every discourse; they are the obsession of every social 48 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities project; but all run aground on them, for all re- main rooted in the classical definition of the masses, which is that of an eschatological faith in the social and its fulfillment. Now, the masses aren't the social, they are the reversion of any social and of any socialism. Enough theorists have criticised meaning, denounced the traps of liberty and the mystifications of the political, radically censured rationality and every form of representation; however, when the masses wan- der through meaning, the political, representa- tion, history, ideology, with a somnambulent strength of denial, when they realise here and now everything which the most radical critics have been able to envisage, then the latter know not what to make of it, and persist in dreaming of a future revolution - a critical revolution, a revolution of prestige, that of the social, that of desire. This revolution by involution is not theirs: it is not critical-explosive, it is implosive and blind. It proceeds by inertia, and not from a new and joyous negativity. It is silent and involutive - exactly the reverse of all speech making and consciousness raising. It has no meaning. It has nothing to say to us. 49 Jean Baudrillard Indeed the only phenomenon which may be in a relation of affinity with it, with these masses such that the final vicissitude of the social and its death is at stake, is terrorism. Nothing is more "cut off from the masses" than terrorism. Power may well try to set the one against the other, but nothing is more strange, more familiar either, than their convergence in denying the social and in refusing meaning. For terrorism claims to real- ly aim at capital (global imperialism, etc.) but it mistakes its enemy, and in doing so it aims at its true enemy, which is the social. Present-day ter- rorism aims at the social in response to the ter- rorism of the social. It aims at the social such as it is produced today - the orbital, interstitial, nuclear, tissual network of control and security, which invests us on all sides and produces us, all of us, as a silent majority. A hyperreal, impercep- tible sociality, no longer operating by law and repression, but by the infiltration of models, no longer by violence, but by deterrence/persuasion - to that terrorism responds by an equally hyperreal act, caught up from the outset in con- centric waves of media and of fascination, 50 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities dedicated from the outset not to any representa- tion or consciousness, but to a mental down- grading by contiguity, fascination and panic, not to reflection or to the logic of cause and effect, but to a chain reaction by contagion - senseless and indeterminate like the system it combats, into which it insinuates itself rather like a point of maximum and infinitesimal implosion - a non- explosive, non-historical, non-political ter- rorism: implosive, crystallising, earth-shattering - and for that matter a homologue deep down, of the silence and inertia of the masses. Terrorism does not aim at making anything speak, at resuscitating or mobilising anything; it has no revolutionary consequences (in this regard, it is rather a complete counter-performance, for which it is violently reproached, but that isn't its game); it aims at the masses in their silence, a silence mesmerised by information; it aims at that white magic of the social encircling us, that of in- formation, of simulation, of deterrence, of anony- mous and random control, in order to precipitate its death by accentuating it. It aims at that white magic of social abstraction by the black magic of a still greater, more anonymous, arbitrary and hazardous abstraction: that of the terrorist act. 51 Jean Baudrillard It is the only non-representative act. In this regard it has an affinity with the masses, who are the only non-representable reality. This is definitely not to say that terrorism would repre- sent the silence and the not-said of the masses, that it would violently express their passive resistance. It is simply to say: there is no equivalent to the blind, non-representative, senseless character of the terrorist act, but the blind, senseless and unrepresentational behavior of the masses. What they do have in common is that they are the most radicaL most intense con- temporary form of the denial of the whole representative system. That is all. No one really knows what relation can be established between two elements that are outside representation, this is a problem of which our epistemology of knowledge permits no resolution, since it always postulates the medium of a subject and of a language, the medium of a representation. We are really only acquainted with representative series, we know little about analogicaL affinitive, im-mediatised, non-reference series and other systems. Undoubtedly something very substan- tial passes between them (the masses and ter- rorism) which we would seek in vain in the 52 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities historical precedents of representative systems (assembly /people, party /proletariat, minorities- marginals/groupuscules ... ). And just as a positive social energy passes between the two poles of any representative system, it could be said that between the masses and terrorism, bet- ween these two non-poles of a non-representative system, also passes an energy, but a reverse energy, an energy not of social accumulation and transformation, but of social dispersal, of disper- sion of the social, of absorption and annulment of the political. It cannot be said that it is the "age of the silent majority" which "produces" terrorism. It is the simultaneity of the two which is staggering, and noteworthy. Whether or not one accepts its brutality, it alone truly marks the end of the political and of the social. It alone betrays this reality of a violent implosion of all our systems of representation. Terrorism does not at all aim at unmasking the repressive character of the State (that is the provocative negativity of groupuscules, who find in this a last chance to be representative iD the eyes of the masses). It propagates, by its own non- representativity, and by chain reaction (not by 53 Jean Baudrillard remonstration and consciousness raising) the ap- parent non-representativity of all power. Here is its subversion: it precipitates non-representation by injecting it in infinitesimal but very concen- trated doses. Its fundamental violence is to deny all the in- stitutions of representation (unions, organised movements, conscious "political" struggle, etc.), including those who play at solidarity with it, for solidarity is still a way of constituting it as model, as emblem, and hence of assigning it to represen- tation. ('They died for us, their action was not wasted ... ") Any means will do to impose mean- ing, to disregard how far terrorism is without legitimacy, without political consequences, without any historical continuity. Its only "rip- ples" are precisely not an historical flow but its story, its shock wave in the media. This story no more belongs to an objective and informative order than terrorism does to the political order. Both are elsewhere, in an order which is neither of meaning nor of representation - mythical perhaps, simulacrum undoubtedly. The other aspect of terrorist violence is its 54 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities disclaiming of any determination and of any quality. In this sense, we must distinguish ter- rorism from "banditry" and commando action. The latter is an act of war aimed at a determinate enemy (blowing up a train, hurling a bomb into the opposing party's headquarters, etc.). The other is dependent on traditional criminal violence (a bank hold-up, sequestration in ex- change for ransom, etc.) All these actions have an economic or martial" objective". Present-day ter- rorism, initiated by the taking of hostages and the game of postponed death, no longer has any ob- jectives (if it claims to have any, they are ridiculous, or unachievable, and in any case, this is quite the most ineffective method of attaining them), nor any determinate enemy. Do the Palestinians strike at Israel by means of in- termediary hostages? No, it is through Israel·as intermediary that they strike at a mythical, or not even mythical, anonymous, undifferentiated enemy; a kind of omnipresent global social order, whenever, whoever, down to the last of the "in- nocents." Terrorism is this: it is novel, and insolu- ble, only because it strikes wherever, whenever, whoever; otherwise it would only be ransom or a military commando act. Its blindness is the exact 55 Jean Baudrillard replica of the system's absolute lack of differen- tiation. For some time the system has no longer separated ends from means, tormentors from vic- tims. In its deadly and indiscriminate taking of hostages, terrorism strikes at precisely the most characteristic product of the whole system: the anonymous and perfectly undifferentiated in- dividual, the term substitutable for any other. Paradoxically, it seems that the innocent pay the crime of being nothing, of being lotless, of having been dispossessed of their name by an equally anonymous system whose purest incarnation they then become. They are the end products of the social, of a now globalised abstract sociality. It is in this sense, in the sense in which they are precisely anybody, that they are the predestined victims of terrorism. It is in this sense, or rather in this defiance of sense, that the terrorist act is akin to the natural catastrophe. There is no difference between an earthquake in Guatemala and the hijacking of a Lufthansa ,Boeing with three hundred passengers on board, between the "natural" intervention and 56 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities the "human" terrorist intervention. Nature is ter- rorist, as is the abrupt failure of the whole technological system: the great New York black- outs ('65 and '77) create more wonderful terrorist situations than the true ones, dream situations. Better: these great technological accidents, like great natural accidents, illustrate the possibility of a radicalsubjectless subversion. The power failure of '77 in New York could have been instigated by a very organised terrorist group; that would have changed nothing in its objective outcome. The same acts of violence, of pillage, the same under- mining, the same suspension of the "social" order would have ensued from it. This signifies that ter- rorism is not a step of violence, but is everywhere in the normality of the social, such that from one moment to the next it can be transfigured into an inverse, absurd, uncontrollable reality. The natural catastrophe acts in this sense and so, paradoxically, it becomes the mythical expression of the catastrophe of the social. Or rather the natural catastrophe being a meaningless, non- representative vicissitude par excellence (unless representative of God, which is why the person in charge of Continental Edison was able to speak of God and his intervention during the last New 57 Jean Baudrillard York blackout), it becomes a kind of symptom or violent incarnation of the state of the social, name- ly of its catastrophe and of the collapse of every representation supporting it. it. Implosive Systems, Explosive Systems In their triangular affinity, the masses, the media and terrorism describe the presently prevailing process of implosion. The whole pro- cess is affected by a violence which is only just beginning, an orbital and nuclear violence of in- take and fascination, a violence of the void (fascination is the extreme intensity of the neutral). For us today, implosion can only be violent and catastrophic because it comes from the failure of the system of explosion and of organised expansion which has predominated in the West now for a few centuries. Implosion is not necessarily a catastrophic process. In a subdued and controlled form, it has even been the main secret of primitive and tradi- 58 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities tional societies. Not expansive or centrifugal con- figurations, but centripetal ones: singular pluralities never directed towards the universal, but centered about a cyclic process - ritual - and tending to "involve" in a non-representative, unauthoritarian process; without any disjunctive polarity, yet without caving in on themselves either (save undoubtedly for certain implosive processes which are inexplicable to us, like the collapse of the T oltec, Olmec, Mayan cultures, nothing of which is known any more, and whose pyramidal empires disappeared without a trace, without any visible catastrophe, as though sud- denly abandoned, without any apparent cause, without any external violence). Thus primitive societies have survived by a controlled implosion - they died as soon as they ceased to control this process, and switched over to one of explosion (demography, or uncontrollable surplus produc- tion, a process of uncontrollable expansion, or quite simply when colonisation violently in- itiated them into the expansive and centrifugal norm of Western systems). Conversely, our "modern" civilisations have existed on a base of expansion and explo- sion at all levels, under the sign of universalised 59 Jean Baudrillard commerce, of economic and philosophical in- vestments, under the sign of universal law and conquest. Undoubtedly even they have known how to survive, for a time at least, on a controlled explosion, on a liberation of subdued and pro- gressive energy, and this was the golden age of their culture. But, according to a process of boom and acceleration, this explosive process has become uncontrollable, it has acquired a fatal speed or amplitude, or rather it has reached the limits of the universal, it has saturated the field of possible expansion and, just ~s primitive societies were ravaged by explosion for not knowing how to curb the implosive process any longer, so our culture begins to be ravaged by implosion for not having known how to curb and equilibrate the explosive process. Implosion is inevitable, and every effort to save the principles of reality, of accumulation, of universality, the principles of evolution which extol expanding systems, is archaic, regressive or nostalgic. Including all those who want to free libidinal energies, plural energies, fragmentary intensities, etc. The "molecular revolution" only represents the final stage of "liberation of energy" (or of proliferation of segments, etc.) up to the in- 60 In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities finitesimal boundaries of the field of expansion which has been that of our culture. The in- finitesimal attempt of desire succeeding the in- finite attempt of capital. The molecular solution succeeding the molar investment of spaces and the social. The final sparks of the explosive system, the final attempt to still control an energy of confines, or to shrink the confines of energy (our fundamental leitmotif) so as to save the prin- ciple of expansion and of liberation. But nothing will halt the implosive process, and the only remaining alternative is between a violent or catastrophic implosion, and a smooth implosion, an implosion in slow motion. There are traces of the latter, of various attempts to con- trol new impulses which are anti-universalist, anti-representative, tribal, centripetal, etc.: com- munes, ecology, ZPG, drugs - all of these un- doubtedly belong to this order. But we must not delude ourselves about a smooth transition. It is doomed to be short lived and to fail. There has been no balanced transition from implosive systems to explosive systems: this has always happened violently, and there is every chance that our passage towards implosion may also be violent and catastrophic. 61    · .. Or the End of the Social The social is not a clear and unequivocal process. Do modern societies correspond to a process of socialisation or to one of pro- gressive desocialisation? Everything depends on one's understanding of the term and none of these is fixed; all are reversible. Thus the in- stitutions which have sign-posted the "advance of the social" (urbanisation, concentration, production, work, medicine, education, social security, insurance, etc.) including capital, which was undoubtedly the most effective socialisation medium of all, could be said to produce and destroy the social in one and the same movement. If the social is formed out of abstract in- stances which are laid down one after the other on the ruins of the symbolic and ceremonial edifice of former societies, then these institu- tions produce more and more of them. But at 65 Jean Baudrillard the same time they consecrate that ravenous, all-consuming abstraction which perhaps devours precisely the "essential marrow" of the social. From that point of view, it could be said that the social regresses to the same degree as its institutions develop. The process accelerates and reaches its maximal extent with mass media and informa- tion. Media, all media, information, all infor- mation, act in two directions: outwardly they produce more of the social, inwardly they neutralise social relations and the social itself. But then, if the social is both destroyed by what produces it (the media, information) and reabsorbed by what it produces (the masses), it follows that its definition is empty, and that this term which serves as universal alibi for ev~ry discourse, no longer analyses anything, no longer designates anything. Not only is it superfluous and useless - wherever it appears it conceals something else: defiance, death, seduction, ritual, repetition - it conceals that it is only abstraction and residue, or even simply an effect of the social, a simulation and an illusion. Even'the term "social relation" is enigmatic? What is a "social relation," what is the "produc- 66 · .. Or, the End of the Social tion of social relations?" Here everything is spurious. Is the social instantaneously, and as if by definition, a "relation," which already presup- poses a serious abstraction and a rational algebra of the social - or else is it something different from what the term "relation" neatly rationalises? Does the "social relation" perhaps exist for something different, namely for what it destroys? Does it perhaps ratify, 'perhaps inaugurate the end of the social? The "social sciences" came to consecrate this obviousness and agelessness of the social. But we must change our tune. There were societies without the social, just as there were societies without history. Networks of symbolic ties were precisely neither "relational" nor "social." At the other extreme, our "society" is perhaps in the process of putting an end to the social, of burying the social beneath a simulation of the social. There are many ways for it to die - as many as there are definitions. Perhaps the social will have had only an ephemeral existence, in the narrow gap between the symbolic formations and our "society" where it is dying. Before, there is not yet 67 Jean Baudrillard any social; after, there is no longer any. Only "sociology" can seem to testify to its agelessness, and the supreme gibberish of the "social sciences" will still echo it long after its disappearance. For two centuries now, the uninterrupted energy of the social has come from deter- ritorialisation and from concentration in ever more unified agencies. A centralised perspective space which orientates everything inserted into it by simple convergence along the "line of flight" towards infinity (in effect, the social, like space and time, opens up a perspective towards infini- ty). The social can only be defined from this panoptic point of view. But let us not forget that this perspective space (in painting and architecture as in politics or the economy) is only one simulation model among others, and that it is characterised only by the fact that it gives rise to effects of truth, of ob- jectivity, unknown and unheard of in the other models. Perhaps, even this is only a delusion? In which case everything that has been contrived and staged in this "comedy of errors" of the social has never had any deep significance. Ultimately, things have never functioned socially, but sym- bolically, magically, irrationally, etc. Which im- 68 · .. Or, the End of the Social plies the formula: capital is a defiance of society. That is to say that this perspective, this panoptic machine, this machine of truth, of rationality, of productivity which is capital, is without objective finality, without reason: it is above all a violence, and this violence is perpetrated by the social on the social, but basically it is not a social machine, it doesn't care a damn about capital or likewise about the social in their equally interdependent and antagonistic definition. This is to say, once more, that there is no contract, no contract is ever exchanged between distinct agencies according to the law - that is all sound and fury - there are only ever stakes, defiances, that is to say something which does not proceed via a "social relation. " (Defiance is not a dialectic, nor a confronta- tion between respective poles, or terms, in an ex- tended structure. It is a process of extermination of the structural position of each term, of the sub- ject position of each of the antagonists, and in particular of the one who hurls the challenge: because of this it even abandons any contractual 69 Jean Baudrillard position which might give rise to a "relation." Ex- change of value is no longer its logic. Its logic abandons positions of value and positions of meaning. The protagonist of defiance is always in a suicidal position, but it is a triumphant suicide: it is by the destruction of value, the destruction of meaning (one's own, their own) that the other is forced into a never equivalent, ever escalating response. Defiance always comes from that which has no meaning, no name, no identity - it is a defiance of meaning, of power, of truth, of their existing as such, of their pretending to exist as such. Only this reversion can put an end to power, to meaning, to value, and never any rela- tion of force, however favorable it is, since the letter re-enters into a polar, binary, structural relation, which re-creates by definition a new space of meaning and of power. 7) Here several hypotheses are possible: 1. - The social has basically never existed. There never has been any "social relation." Nothing has ever functioned socially. On this in- escapable basis of challenge, seduction and 70 · .. Or, the End of the Social death, there has never been anything but simula- tion of the social and the social relation. In which case, there is no point dreaming about a "real" sociality, a hidden sociality, an ideal socialist: this just hypostatises a simulacrum. If the social is a simulation, the only likely turn of events is that of a brutal de-simulation - the social ceasing to take itself as a space of reference and to play the game, and putting an end at last to power, to the effect of power and to the mirror of the social which perpetuates it. A de-simulation which itself captures the style of a challenge (the reverse of capital's challenge of the social and society): a challenge to the belief that capital and power exist according to their own logic - they have none, they vanish as apparatuses as soon as the simula- tion of social space is undone. 8 This is really what we are seeing today: the disintegration of the whole idea of the social, the consumption and in- volution of the social, the breakdown of the social simulacrum, a genuine defiance of the con- structive and productive approach to the social which dominates us. All quite suddenly, as if the social had never existed. A breakdown which has all the features of a catastrophe, not an evolution or revolution. No longer a "crisis" of the social, 71 Jean Baudrillard but the reabsorption of its system. Without hav- ing anything to do with those marginal defections (of the mad, women, druggies, delinquents), which, on the contrary, supply new energy to the failing social. This reabsorption process can no longer be resocialised. Like a ghost at dawn, its principle of reality and of social rationality simp- ly fades away. 2.- The social has really existed, it exists even more and more, it invests everything, it alone exists. Far from being volatilised, it is the social which triumphs; the reality of the social is imposed everywhere. But, contrary to the antiquated idea which makes the social into an objective progress of mankind, everything which escapes it being on- ly residue, it is possible to envisage that the social itself is only residue, and that, if it has triumphed in the real, it is precisely as such. Litter piling up from the symbolic order as it blows around, it is the social as remainder which has assumed real force and which is soon to be universal. 9 Here is a more subtle form of death. In this event, we are really even deeper in the social, even deeper in pure excrement, in the fan- 72 · .. Or, the End of the Social tastic congestion of dead labor, of dead and in- stitutionalised relations within terrorist bureau- cracies, of dead languages and grammars (the very term "relation" already has something dead about it, something about death to it). Then of course it can no longer be said that the social is dying, since it is already the ac- cumulation of death. In effect we are in a civilisa- tion of the supersocial, and simultaneously in a civilisation of non-degradable, indestructible residue, piling up as the social spreads. Waste and recycling: such would be the social in the image of a production whose cycle has long escaped the "social" finalities to become a completely described spiral nebula, rotating and expanding with every "revolution" it makes. Thus one sees the social expanding throughout history as a "rational" control of residues, and a rational production of residues. 1544 saw the opening of the first great poor- house in Paris: vagrants, lunatics, the sick, everyone not integrated by the group and dis- carded as remainders were taken in charge under the emerging sign of the social. This was extended 73 Jean Baudrillard to the dimensions of National Assistance in the nineteenth century, then Social Security in the twentieth century. Proportional to the reinforce- ment of social reason, it is the whole community which soon becomes residual and hence, by one more spiral, the social which piles up. When the remainders reach the dimensions of the whole of society, one has a perfect socialisation. 10 Everybody is completely excluded and taken in charge, completely disintegrated and socialised. Symbolic integration is replaced by a func- tional integration, functional institutions take charge of the residue from symbolic disintegra- tion - a social agency appears where there was none, nor even any name for it. "Social relations" fester, proliferate, grow proportionately richer with this disintegration. And the social sciences cap it off. Whence the piquancy of an expression like: "the responsibility of society vis-a-vis its underprivileged members," when we know the "social" is precisely the agency which arises from this dereliction. Whence the interest of Le Monde's "Society" column where paradoxically only immigrants, 74 · .. Or, the End of the Social delinquents, women, etc. appear: precisely those who have not been socialised; the social "case" being analogous to the pathological case. Pockets to be absorbed, segments which the social isolates the more it spreads. Designated as refuse on the horizon of the social, they thus fall under its jurisdiction and are fated to find their place in a widening sodality. It is on these remainders that the social machine starts up again and finds sup- port for a new extension. But what happens when everybody is socialised? Then the machine stops, the dynamic is reversed, and it is the whole social system which becomes residue. As the social pro- gressively gets rid of all of its residue, it becomes residual itself. By placing residual categories under the rubric "Society," the social designates itself as remainder. Now what becomes of the rationality of the social, of the contract and of the social relation if the social, instead of appearing as original struc- ture, appears as refuse, and refuses processing? If the social is only remains, it is no longer the scene of a positive process or history, it is simply the scene of a piling up and exorbitant processing of 75 Jean Baudrillard death. It no longer makes any sense, since it is there for something else, in despair of anything else: it is excremental. Without any ideal perspec- tive. For remains are the transcendence of nothingness, they are what is irreconcilable in death, and on them can only be founded a politics of death. Reclusion or preclusion. Under the sign of productive reason, the social has been above all the space of a great Reclusion - under the sign of simulation and deterrence it has become the space of a great Preclusion. But perhaps that is already no longer a "social" space. It is from the point of view of this adminis- tration of refuse that the social can appear today for what it really is: a right, a need, a service, a use value pure and simple. No longer a conflic- tual, political structure: but a welcoming struc- ture. The limit of the economist value of the social as use value is in effect its ecologist value as niche. The proper use of the social as one of the ways of balancing the exchanges between the in- dividual and his environment, the social as func- tional ecosystem, homeostasis and superbiology of the species - no longer even a structure, but a substance: the cordial and high protein anonymi- ty of a nutritious substance. A kind of foetal 76 · .. Or, the End of the Social security space helping everywhere to relieve the difficulties of living, providing everywhere for the quality of life, like comprehensive insurance, the equivalent of a wasted life; a degraded form of lubricating, insuring, passifying and permis- sive sociality; the lowest form of social energy: that of an environmental, behavioral utility. Such is the face of the social for us - its entropic form - the other face of its death. [ EXCURSUS: The Social, or ] The Functional Ventilation of Remainders [The social exists to look after the soaking up of excess wealth which, redistributed to all and sun- dry, would ruin the social order, would create an intolerably utopian situation. This reversion of wealth, of all wealth, which formerly was effected by sacrifice which left no room for any accumulation of remainders, is intolerable to our societies. It is by this very fact that they are "societies" - in the sense that they always produce a surplus, remainders - whether it be demographic, economic, or linguistic - and that these remainders must be cleared up (never sacrificed, that is too dangerous: but purely and 77 Jean Baudrillard simply got rid of). The social exists on the double basis of the production of remainders and their eradication. If all wealth were sacrificed, people would lose a sense of the real. If all wealth became disposable, people would lose a sense of the useful and the useless. The social exists to take care of the useless consumption of remainders so that individuals can be assigned to the useful management of their lives. Use and use value constitute a fundamental ethics. But it exists only in a simulation of shortage and calculation. If all wealth was redistributed, of itself this would abolish use value (the same goes for death: if death was redistributed, brought for- ward, of itself this would abolish life as use value). It would suddenly and brutally become clear that use value is only a cruel and disillusioning moral convention, which presupposes a functional cal- culation in all things. But it dominates us all and, intoxicated as we are by the phantasm of use value, we could not bear this catastrophe of reversing wealth and of reversing death. It is not that everything should be reversed; just that the remainder should be. And the social is what takes 78 · .. Or, the End of the Social care of remainders. Up till now the car and the house, and various "commodities" have somehow or other succeeded in soaking up the disposable physical and mental capacities of individuals. What would happen if all disposable wealth was redistributed amongst them? Quite simply, the bottom would drop out of their lives - they would lose the fabric and even tempo of a well-tempered economy, lose a sense of self-interest and of purpose. A brutal disequilibrium of the value system would result (a sudden influx of cash is the most rapid and the most radical way to ruin a currency). Or else, as in the affluent society, they would be reduced to a pathological multiplication of use value (3,4, n cars) where in any case this dissipates into a hyper- real functionalism. All surplus is capable of ruining the system of equivalences, if it is disproportionately poured back into it, and of driving our mental system of equivalences to despair at the same time. l1 Hence there is a kind of wisdom in the institution of the social as a matrix preventing the growth and reversion of wealth, as a medium for its controlled squandering. In a society incapable of total reversion and 79 Jean Baudrillard committed to use value, there is a kind of intelli- gence and wisdom in the institution of the social and of its "objective" wastefulness: prestige opera- tions, Concorde, the moon, missiles, satellites, even public works and Social Security in their ab- surd one-upmanship. An implicit understanding of the stupidity and the limits of use value. The true artlessness is that of socialists and humanists of every shade who want all wealth to be redistributed and that there should be no useless expenditure, etc. Socialism, the champion of use value, the champion of the use value of the social, reveals a total misunderstanding of the social. It believes that the social can become the optimal collective management of the use value of men and things. But the social is never that. Despite any socialist longing, it is insane, uncontrollable, a monstrous protuberance, which expends, which destroys, without any thought to optimal man- agement. And it is precisely in this way that it is functional, that it fulfils its role (despite what idealists may cry). This is, to maintain a contrario the principle of use value, to save the reality prin- ciple by the roundabout but objective route of wastefulness. The social manufactures this priva- 80 · .. Or, the End of the Social tion necessary to the distinction between good and evil, and to the whole moral order in general - a privation absent from the "first affluent societies" described by Marshall Sahlins. This is what social- ism does not see and why, by wanting to abolish this privation and insisting on a generalised access to wealth, it puts an end to the social while believ- ing that it is heightening it. From this point of view the problem of the death of the social is simple: the social dies from an extension of use value which is equivalent to its extermination. When everything, including the social, becomes use value, it is a world become inert, where the reverse of what Marx dreamed occurs. He dreamed of the economic be- ing reabsorbed into a (transfigured) social; what is happening to us is the social being reabsorbed into a (banalised) political economy: administra- tion pure and simple. It is the wrong use of wealth which saves a society. Nothing has changed since Mandeville and his Fable of the Bees. And socialism can do nothing to prevent it. The whole of political economy has been invented to dissolve this paradox, this maleficent ambiguity of the social functioning. But it has always come to grief, by a 81 Jean Baudrillard sort of secondary functionality. Or else, it is in the process of succeeding and, after having seen the abolition of the political and its dilution in the social, we are in the process of seeing the reab- sorption of the social back into the economic - an economy even more political, and lacking in "hubris," an economy of extravagance and excess which would still characterise the capitalist age.J 3. - The social has well and truly existed, but does not exist any more. It has existed as coherent space, as reality principle: the social relation, the production of social relations, the social as dynamic abstraction, scene of conflicts and historical contradictions, the social as struc- ture and as stake, as strategy and as ideal - all this has had an end in view, all this has meant something. The social has not always been a delusion, as in the first hypothesis, nor re- mainder, as in the second. But precisely, it has only had an end in view, a meaning as power, as work, as capital, from the perspective space of a rational distribution, from the finalised space of an ideal convergence, which is also that of pro- duction - in short, in the narrow gap of second- 82 · .. Or, the End of the Social order simulacra, and, absorbed into third-order simulacra, it is dying. End of the perspective space of the social. The rational sociality of the contract, dialectical sociality (that of the State and of civil society, of public and private, of the social and the in- dividual) gives way to the sociality of contact, of the circuit and transistorised network of millions of molecules and particles maintained in a ran- dom gravitational field, magnetised by the cons- tant circulation and the thousands of tactical combinations which electrify them. But is it still a question of the socius? Where is sociality in Los Angeles? And where will it be later on, in a future generation (for Los Angeles is still that of TV, movies, the telephone and the automobile), that of a total dissemination, of a ventilation of in- dividuals as terminals of information, in an even more measurable - not convergent, but con- nected - space: a space of connection? The social only exists in a perspective space, it dies in the space of simulation, which is also a space of deterrence. The space of simulation confuses the real 83 Jean Baudrillard with the model. There is no longer any critical and speculative distance between the real and the rational. There is no longer really even any pro- jection of models in the real (which is still equivalent to the substitution of the map for the territory in Borges), but an in-the-field, here-and- now transfiguration of the real into model. A fan- tastic short-circuit: the real is hyperrealised. Neither realised, nor idealised: but hyperrealised. The hyper real is the abolition of the real not by violent destruction, but by its assumption, eleva- tion to the strength of the model. Anticipation, deterrence, preventive transfiguration, etc.: the model acts as a sphere of absorption of the real. That is clear in some of its subtle, tenuous, imperceptible features, by which the real appears as more true than the true, as too real to be true. The task of all media and information today is to produce this real, this extra real (interviews, live coverage, movies, TV-truth, etc.). There is too much of it, we fall into obscenity and porn. As in porn, a kind of zoom takes us too near the rea1, which never existed and only ever came into view at a certain distance. Deterrence of all real poten- 84 · .. Or, the End of the Social tiality, deterrence by meticulous reduplication, by macroscopic hyperfidelity, by accelerated recycling, by saturation and obscenity, byaboli- tion of the distance between the real and its representation, by implosion of the differentiated poles between which flowed the energy of the real: this hyperreality puts an end to the system of the real, it puts an end to the real as referential by exalting it as model. It also puts an end to the social in the same way. The social, if it existed with second-order simulacra, no longer even has the opportunity to be produced with third-order ones: from the beginning it is trapped in its own "blown up" and desperate staging, in its own obscenity. Signs of this hyperrealisation of the social, signs of its reduplication and its anticipated fulfillment are everywhere. The transparency of the social rela- tion is flaunted, signified, consumed everywhere. The history of the social will never have had time to lead to revolution: it will have been outstrip- ped by signs of the social and of revolution. The social will never have had time to lead to socialism, it will have been short-circuited by the hypersocial, by the hyperreality of the social (but perhaps socialism is no more than this?). Thus the 85 Jean Baudrillard proletariat will not have even had time to deny itself as such: the concept of class will have dissolved well before, into some parodic, extend- ed double, like "the mass of workers" or simply into a retrospective simulation of the proletariat. Thus, even before political economy leads to its dialectical overthrow, to the resolution of all needs and to the optimal organisation of things, before it would have been able to see whether there was any basis to all that, it will have been captivated by hyperreality of the economy (the stepping up of production, the precession of the production of demand before that of goods, the indefinite scenario of crisis). Nothing has corne to the end of its history, or will henceforth any more, for nothing escapes this precession of simulacra. And the social itself has died before having given up its secret. 12 Nevertheless let us tenderly recall the unbelievable naivety of social and socialist think- ing, for thus having been able to reify as universal and to elevate as ideal of transparency such a totally ambiguous and contradictory - worse, such a residual or imaginary - worse, such an already abolished in its very simulation - "reality": the social. 86 · .. Or, the End of the Social NOTES 1. This is akin to the bitterness of the extreme-left, and its "intelligent" cynicism towards the silent majority. Charlie-Hebda for instance: 'The silent majority doesn't give a damn about anything, provided that it snoozes through the evening in its slippers ... Mind you, if the silent majority keeps its trap shut, it is because when all is said and done, it makes the law. It lives well, it eats well, it works just as much as is necessary. What it asks of its leaders is to be fathered and secured just enough, with a lit- tle daily dose of imaginary danger." 2. There the analogy with Freud ends, for his radical act results in a hypothesis, that of repression and the un- conscious, which again opens up the possibility, widely exploited since then, of producing meaning, of reintegrating desire and the unconscious in the partition of meaning. A symphony concertante, in which the relentless reversion of meaning enters the well-tempered scenario of desire, in the shadow of a repression which opens up the reverse possibility of liberation. Whence comes the fact that the liberation of desire could so easily take over from the political revolution, making good the failure of meaning instead of deepening it. Now it is not at 87 Jean Baudrillard all a question of discovering a new interpretation of the masses in terms of libidinal economy (the conformity or "fascism" of the masses reduced to a latent structure, to an obscure desire for power and for repression which would possibly feed off a primary repression or death drive). Such is the only alternative today to the failing marxist analysis. But it is the same, with one more twist. Formerly the destiny of revolution held back by sexual bondage was palmed off on the masses (Reich); today it is a desire for alienation and for bondage, or else a kind of ordinary microfascism as incomprehensible as their virtual drive for liberation. There is no desire for fascism and for power any more than there is for revolution. Last hope: that the masses have an unconscious or a desire, which would allow their recathexis as bearer, or instrument of meaning. Desire, reinvented everywhere, is only the referential of political despair. And the strategy of desire, after having been tried out in the marketing industry, is today polished up further in its revolutionary promotion in the masses. 3. The notion of "critical mass," usually associated with the process of nuclear explosion, is reapplied here with reference to nuclear implosion. What we are witness- ing in the domain of the social and of the political, with the involuntary phenomenon of the masses and the silent ma- jority, is a kind of inverse explosion by the force of inertia - this also has its point of no return. 4. It is no longer even a question of the production of the social, for then socialism, indeed capitalism itself 88 · .. Or, the End of the Social would be equal to the task. In fact, everything changes with the precession of the production of demand before that of goods. Their logical relationship (between produc- tion and consumption) is broken, and we move into a totally different order. which is no longer that of either production, or consumption, but that of the simulation of both, thanks to the inversion of the process. At present, it is no longer a question of a "real" crisis of capital. a crisis Attali thinks can be treated by a little extra social or socialism, but of quite a different mechanism, the hyper- real. which no longer has anything to do with either capital or the social. 5. Same configuration as for black holes. Veritable stellar tombs, their field of gravity is so huge that even light is trapped, satellised, then absorbed in them. They are, therefore, regions in space from which no information can come. Their discovery and their being taken into con- sideration therefore imply a kind of overturning of every traditional science and knowledge procedure. While the latter is always based on information, the message, the positive signal (some "meaning"). conveyed by a medium (waves or light). here something different appears whose meaning or mystery revolves around the absence of infor- mation. That no longer transmits, that no longer res- ponds. A revolution of the same order comes into play with the taking into consideration of the masses. 6. L'effet Beaubourg, Paris, 1977 (Ed. Galilee). 89 Jean Baudrillard 7. The same goes for seduction. If sex and sexuality, such as the sexual revolution turns them into, are really a mode of exchange and production of sexual relations, seduction on the other hand is contrary to exchange, and close to challenge. Sexuality has precisely become a "sex- ual relation," it can be talked about in these already ra- tionalised terms of value and exchange, only by ignoring any form of seduction - just as the social only becomes a "social relation" when it has lost any symbolic dimension. 8. But defying the social can take the reverse form of a renewed outbreak of the social simulacrum, of social de- mand, of demand for the social. An exacerbated, com- pulsive hyperconformity, a much more pressing demand for the social as norm and as discourse. 9. See, in L'Echange symbolique et la mort, the three levels of residue: value in the economic order, phantasm in the psychic order, signification in the linguistic order. So one should also add here the residual status of the social in the ... social order. 10. See the case of the Guayaki or the Tupi-Guarani: whenever such residue appears, it is drained off by mes- sianic leaders into the Atlantic, in the form of eschato- logical movements, which purge the group of its "social" residue. Not only political power (Clastres) but even the social is averted as disintegrated/ disintegrating agency. 11. This system of equivalences is not necessarily 90 · .. Or, the End of the Social linked to the political economy of capital. The equilibrium between work and its remuneration, between merit and enjoyment, is perhaps, beyond any bourgeois ethic, a measure of oneself, and a form of resistance. Should something come your way without equivalent, the bless- ing may be mixed. Holderlin's madness came to him from this prodigality of the Gods, from this grace of the Gods which overwhelms you and becomes fatal if it can't be redeemed or counterbalanced by some human equiva- lence, from the earth, from toil. Here there is a sort of law which has nothing to do with bourgeois ethics. More familiar to us, witness the fatal disorder in people overex- posed to wealth and to good fortune - thus those customers in a large store who were offered to help themselves to anything they wanted: pandemonium broke out. Or again those wine growers to whom the State of- fered more money to pull out their vines than they could get by working them. They were much more destructured by this unexpected subsidy than by any traditiona'l ex- ploitation of their labor power. 12. Fourth hypothesis: The implosion of the social in- to the masses. This hypothesis is akin to hypothesis 3 (simulation/deterrencelimplosion) in another form. It is developed in the main text. 91  THE IMPLOSION OF MEANING IN THE MEDIA  We are in a universe where there is more and more information, and less and less meaning. Consider three hypotheses: 1.- Either information produces meaning (a negentropic factor), but doesn't succeed in com- pensating for the brutal loss of signification in every domain. The reinjection of message and content by means of the media is vain, since meaning is devoured and lost more rapidly than it is reinjected. In this case, appeal has to be made to a productivity at the base in order to relieve the failing media. This is the whole ideology of free speech, of the media subdivided into innumer- able individual cells of transmission, indeed "anti-media" (CB radios, etc.). 2. - Or information has nothing to do with signification. It is something else, an operational model of another order, outside of meaning and 95 Jean Baudrillard the circulation of meaning properly speaking. This is the hypothesis of Shannon: a sphere of in- formation that is purely instrumental, a technical medium implying no end purpose of meaning, and thus which must not itself be implicated in a value judgement. A kind of code, perhaps like the genetic code: it is what it is, it functions as it does; meaning is something else, corning afterwards in some way, as in Jacques Monod's Chance and Necessity. In this case, there would simply be no significant relation between the inflation of infor- mation and the deflation of meaning. 3.- Or rather the contrary: there is a rigorous and necessary correlation between the two, to the extent that information is directly destructive of meaning and signification, or neutralizes it. The loss of meaning is directly linked to the dissolving and dissuasive action of information, the media, and the mass media. The third hypothesis is the most interesting, although it goes against the grain of all accepted opinion. Everywhere socialization is measured according to exposure through media messages. Those who are under-exposed to the media are virtually asocial or desocialized. Everywhere in- 96 Implosion of Meaning in the Media formation is reputed to produce an accelerated circulation of meaning, a plus-value of meaning homologous to the economic plus-value which results from the accelerated rotation of capital. Information is given as creative of communica- tion, and even if the wastage is enormous a general consensus would have it that there is in the total nonetheless a surplus of meaning, which is redistributed in all the interstices of the social fabric - just as a consensus would have it that material production, despite its dysfunctions and irrationalities, nevertheless leads to an excess of wealth and social finality. We are all accomplices in this myth. It is the alpha and omega of our modernity, without which the credibility of our social organization would collapse. Yet the fact is that it is collapsing, and for this very reason. Just where we think that information is producing meaning, it is doing the exact opposite. Information devours its own contents; it devours communication and the social, and for two reasons: 1. Instead of causing communication, it ex- 97 Jean Baudrillard hausts itself in the act of staging the communica- tion; instead of producing meaning, it exhausts itself in the staging of meaning. It is a gigantic process of simulation with which we are very familiar. The non-directed interview, speech, listeners who telephone in, participation at all levels, blackmail through speech - all say: "It's your concern, you are the event, etc." More and more information is invaded by this sort of phan- tom content, this homeopathic graft, this awaken- ed dream of communication. It is a circular set-up in which the desire of the audience is put on stage, an anti-theater of communication, which, as we know, is never anything but the recycling "in the negative" of traditional institutions, the integrated circuit of the negative. Immense energies are deployed in order to keep this simulacre standing upright, and to avoid the brutal de-simulation which would confront us with the obvious reality of a radical loss of meaning. It is useless to wonder if it is the loss of com- munication which causes this escalation in the simulacre, or if it is the simulacre which is there first, with its dissuasive finality, since it short- circuits in advance all possibility of communica- tion (precession of the model which puts an end to 98 Implosion of Meaning in the Media the real). It is useless to wonder which is the first term. There is none, it is a cicular process - that of simulation, that of the hyperreal: a hyperreality of communication and of meaning, more real than the real. Hence the real is abolished. Thus communication as well as the social functions as a closed circuit, as a lure - to which is attached the force of a myth. The belief and the faith in information attached to this tautological proof give the system itself, by doubling its signs, an unlocatable reality. But this belief may be thought to be as am- biguous as the one attached to myths in archaic societies. One both believes and doesn't believe. The question is simply not posed. "I know very well, but all the same .... " A sort of inverted simulation corresponds in the masses, in each one of us, to this simulation of meaning and of com- munication in which this system encloses us. To the tautology of the system the masses have responded with ambivalence; to dissuasion they have responded with disaffection, and an always enigmatic belief. The myth exists, but one must guard against thinking that people believe in it. That is the trap of critical thought, which can 99 Jean Baudrillard only be exercized given the naivete and the stupidity of the masses as a presupposition. 2. Behind this exacerbated staging of com- munication, the mass media, with its pressure of information, carries out an irresistable destruc- turation of the social. Thus information dissolves meaning and the social into a sort of nebulous state leading not at all to a surfeit of innovation but to the very con- trary, to total entropy. 1 Thus the media do not bring about socializa- tion, but just the opposite: the implosion of the social in the masses. And this is only the macroscopic extension of the implosion of mean- ing at the microscopic level of the sign. The latter is to be analyzed starting from McLuhan's for- mula the medium is the message, the conse- quences of which are far from being exhausted. Its meaning is that all the contents of mean- ing are absorbed in the dominant form of the medium. The medium alone makes the event - and does this whatever the contents, whether conformist or subversive. A serious problem for 100 Implosion of Meaning in the Media all counter-information, pirate radios, anti- media, etc. But there is something even more serious, which McLuhan himself did not make clear. For beyond this neutralization of all con- tent, one could still hope to manipulate the medium in its form, and to transform the real by utilizing the impact of the medium as form. With all content nullified, perhaps there is still a revolutionary and subversive use-value of the medium as such. Yet - and this is where McLuhan's formula at its extreme limit leads - there is not only the implosion of the message in the medium; in the same movement there is the implosion of the medium itself in the real, the im- plosion of the medium and the real in a sort of nebulous hyperreality where even the definition and the distinct action of the medium are no longer distinguishable. Even the "traditional status" of the media themselves, characteristic of our modernity, is put into question. McLuhan's fonnula, the medium is the message, which is the key fonnula of the era of simulation (the medium is the message - the sender is the receiver - the circularity of all poles - the end of panoptic and perspectival space - such is the alpha and omega of our modernity), 101 Jean Baudrillard this very formula must be envisaged at its limit, where, after all contents and messages have been volatilized in the medium, it is the medium itself which is volatilized as such. At bottom, it is still the message which lends credibility to the medium, and which gives to the medium its distinct and determined status as intermediary of communication. Without a message, the medium also falls into that indefinite state characteristic of all our great systems of judgement and value. A single model, whose efficacy is immediacy, simultaneously generates the message, the medium, and the "real." In short, the medium is the message signifies not only the end of the message, but also the end of the medium. There are no longer media in the literal sense of the term (I am talking above all about the electronic mass media) - that is to say, a power mediating between one reality and another, between one state of the real and another - neither in content nor in form. Strictly speaking, this is what implosion signifies: the ab- sorption of one pole into another, the short- circuit between poles of every differential system of meaning, the effacement of terms and of 102 Implosion of Meaning in the Media distinct oppositions, and thus that of the medium and the real. Hence the impossibility of any mediation, of any dialectical intervention bet- ween the two or from one to the other, circularity of all media effects. Hence the impossibility of a sense (meaning), in the literal sense of a unilateral vector which leads from one pole to another. This critical - but original - situation must be thought through to the very end; it is the only one we are left with. It is useless to dream of a revolu- tion through content or through form, since the medium and the real are now in a single nebulous state whose truth is undecipherable. The fact of this implosion of contents, of ab- sorption of meaning, of the evanescence of the medium itself, of the re-absorption of the whole dialectic of communication in a total circularity of the model, of the implosion of the social in the masses, can appear catastrophic and hopeless. But it is only so in regard to the idealism that dominates our whole vision of information. We all live by a fanatical idealism of meaning and communication, by an idealism of communica- tion through meaning, and, in this perspective, it is very much a catastrophe of meaning which lies in wait for us. 103 Jean Baudrillard But it must be seen that the term "catastrophe" has this "catastrophic" meaning of the end and annihilation only in a linear vision of accumulation and productive finality that the system imposes on us. Etymologically, the term only signifies the curvature, the winding down to the bottom of a cycle leading to what can be call- ed the "horizon of the event," to the horizon of meaning, beyond which we cannot go. Beyond it, nothing takes place that has meaning for us - but it suffices to exceed this ultimatum of mean- ing in order that catastrophe itself no longer ap- pear as the last, nihilistic day of reckoning, such as it functions in our current collective fantasy. Beyond meaning, there is fascination, which results from the neutralization and implosion of meaning. Beyond the horizon of the social, there are the masses, which result from the neutraliza- tion and implosion of the social. The essential thing today is to evaluate this double challenge - the defiance of meaning by the masses and their silence (which is not at all a passive resistance) - and the defiance of mean- ing which comes from the media and its fascina- tion. In regard to this challenge all the marginal and alternative attempts to resuscitate meaning 104 Implosion of Meaning in the Media are secondary. Evidently there is a paradox in this inex- tricable conjunction of the masses and the media: is it the media that neutralizes meaning and that produces the "unformed" (or informed) mass, or is it the mass that victoriously resists the media by diverting or absorbing all the messages which it produces without responding to them? Some time ago, in "Requiem for the Media," I analyzed (and condemned) the media as the institution of an irreversible model of communication without response. But today? This absence of response can be understood as a counter-strategy of the masses themselves in their encounter with power, and no longer at all as a strategy of power. What then? Are the mass media on the side of power in the manipulation of the masses, or are they on the side of the masses in the liquidation of meaning, in the violence done to meaning and in the fascination that results? Is it the media which in- duce fascination in the masses, or is it the masses which divert the media into spectacle? Mogadishu Stammheim: the media are made the 105 Jean Baudrillard vehicle of the moral condemnation of terrorism and of the exploitation of fear for political ends, but, simultaneously, in the most total ambiguity, they propagate the brutal fascination of the ter- rorist act. They are themselves terrorists, to the extent to which they work through fascination (d. Umberto Eco on this eternal moral dilemma: how not to speak of terrorism, how to find a good use for the media? There is none ). The media carry meaning and non-sense; they manipulate in every sense simultaneously. The process cannot be controlled, for the media convey the simula- tion internal to the system and the simulation destructive of the system according to a logic that is aboslutely Moebian and circular - and this is exactly what it is like. There is no alternative to it, no logical resolution. Only a logical exacerbation and a catastrophic resolution. With one qualification. We are face to face with this system, in a double situation, an insolu- ble "double bind" exactly like children face to face with the adult universe. They are simultaneously summoned to behave like autonomous subjects, 106 Implosion of Meaning in the Media responsible, free, and conscious, and as submis- sive objects, inert, obedient, and conforming. The child resists on all levels, and to a contradic- tory demand he also responds with a double strategy. To the demand to be an object, he op- poses all the practices of disobedience, revolt, emancipation; in short, a total claim to subject- hood. To the demand to be a subject, he opposes just as stubbornly and efficaciously with an ob- ject's resistance, that is to say, in exactly the op- posite manner: infantilism, hyperconformism, a total dependence, passivity, idiocy. Neither of the two strategies has more objective value than the other. The resistance-as-subject is today unilaterally valorized and held as positive - just as in the political sphere only the practices of liberation, emancipation, expression, and con- stitution as a political subject are taken to be valuable and subversive. But this is to ignore the equal or perhaps even superior impact, of all the practices-as-object - the renunciation of the position of subject and of meaning - exactly the practices of the masses - which we bury and forget under the contemptuous terms of aliena- tion and passivity. The liberating practices res- pond to one of the aspects of the system, to the 107 Jean Baudrillard constant ultimatum to make of ourselves pure objects, but they don't respond at all to the other demand, which is to constitute ourselves as sub- jects, to liberate ourselves, to express ourselves at any price, to vote, produce, decide, speak, par- ticipate, play the game - a form of blackmail and ultimatum just as serious as the other, prob- ably even more serious today. To a system whose argument is oppression and repression, the stra- tegic resistance is the liberating claim of subject- hood. But this reflects rather the system's previous phase, and even if we are still con- fronted with it, it is no longer the strategic terrain: the system's current argument is the maximiza- tion of the word and the maximal production of meaning. Thus the strategic resistance is that of a refusal of meaning and a refusal of the word - or of the hyperconformist simulation of the very mechanisms of the system, which is a form of refusal and of non-reception. This is the resistance of the masses: it is equivalent to sending back to the system its own logic by doubling it, to reflecting, like a mirror, meaning without absorbing it. This strategy (if one can still speak of strategy) prevails today, 108 Implosion of Meaning in the Media because it was ushered in by that phase of the system. A mistake concerning strategy is a serious matter. All the movements which only bet on liberation, emancipation, the resurrection of the subject of history, of the group, of speech as a raising of consciousness, indeed of a "seizure of the unconscious" of subjects and of the masses, do not see that they are acting in accordance with the system, whose imperative today is the over- production and regeneration of meaning and speech. NOTES 1. Here we have discussed information only in the social register of communication. But it would be fascinating to consider the hypothesis within the framework of the cybernetic theory of communication. There also, the fundamental thesis would have it that in- formation would be synonymous with negentropy, the resistance to entropy, and an excess of meaning and of organization. But it would be fitting to pose the opposite hypothesis: INFORMATION = ENTROPY. For exam- ple: the information or knowledge about a system or an event that can be obtained is already a form of neutraliza- 109 Jean Baudrillard tion and of entropy of this system. (This applies to the sciences in general and to the human and social sciences in particular.) The information in which an event is reflected or through which it is diffused is already a degraded form of the event. One would not hesitate to analyze the in- tervention of the media in May 1968 in this sense. The ex- tension given to the student action permitted the general strike, but the latter was precisely a black box which neutralized the original virulence of the movement. The very amplification was a mortal trap and not a positive ex- tension. Distrust the universalization of struggles through information. Distrust campaigns of solidarity at every level, this solidarity that is both electronic and worldwide. Every strategy of the universalization of differences is an entropic strategy of the system. 110 OUR THEATER OF CRUELTY  I. Mogadishu In the terrorist act there is a simultaneous power of death and simulation which it is in- tolerable to see confused with the "morbid taste of death," and with the frenzy of the "morbid" and the "spectacular." Dead or living, it is elsewhere that terrorism wins out. At least by this single fact: it alone makes the event, and thus returns the whole "political" order to its nullity. And the media, all while orchestrating the victory of order, only cause the evidence for the opposite to reverberate: to wit, that ter- rorism is burying the political order. The media are terrorists in their own fashion, working continually to produce (good) sense, but, at the same time, violently 113 Jean Baudrillard defeating it by arousing everywhere a fascina- tion without scruples, that is to say, a paralysis of meaning, to the profit of a single scenario. Terrorism is not violent in itself; only the spectacle it unleashes is truly violent. It is our Theater of Cruelty, the only one that remains to us, perhaps equal in every respect to that of Ar- taud or to that of the Renaissance, and extraor- dinary in that it brings together the spectacular and the challenge at their highest points. It is at the same time a model of simulation, a micro- model flashing with a minimally real event and a maximal echo chamber, like a crystal thrown into an unstable solution or an experimental matrix, an insoluble equation which makes all the variables appear suddenly. Not a real event, but a condensed narrative, a flash, a scenario - that is to say, that which opposes to every event said to be real the purest form of the spectacular - and a ritual, or that which, of all possible events, opposes to the political and historical model or order the purest symbolic form of challenge. A strange mixture of the symbolic and the spectacular, of challenge and simulation. This 114 Ou r Theater of Cruelty paradoxical configuration is the only original form of our time, and subversive because insolu- ble. There is neither victory nor defeat: no sense can be made of an event which is irremediably spectacular, or irremediably symbolic. Every- thing in terrorism is ambivalent and reversible: death, the media, violence, victory. Who plays into the other's hands? Death itself is undefinable: the death of the terrorists is equivalent to that of the hostages; they are substitutable. In spite of all the efforts to set them into radical opposition, fascination allows no distinction to be made, and rightly so, for power finally does not make any either, but settles its accounts with everyone, and buries Baader and Schleyer together at Stuttgart in its incapacity to unravel the deaths and rediscover the fine dividing line, the distinctive and valid oppositions which are the secret of law and order. Nor is it possible to reclaim a positive use for the media, or a transparence of repres- sion: the repressive act traverses the same un- foreseeable spiral as the terrorist act·; no one knows where it will stop, nor all the setbacks and reversals that will ensue. There is no distinction possible between the spectacular and the sym- bolic, no distinction possible between the" crime" 115 Jean Baudrillard and the "repression." It is this uncontrollable eruption of reversibility that is the true victory of terrorism. This victory lies not at all in the fact of im- posing a negotiation and forcing a government to capitulate. Besides, the objective - most of the time to liberate imprisoned comrades - is typically a zero sum equation. The stakes are elsewhere. And if power wins out at the level of the objective, it loses at the level of the real stakes. It loses its political definition, and is forced to ac- cept, all the while trying to thwart, this rever- sibility of all the actors in the same process. T er- rorists, killers, hostages, leaders, spectators, public opinion - there is no more innocence in a system which has no meaning. No tragedy either (in spite of the ideology of the Baader group itself, and the pedagogy of the terrorist model on a world-wide scale). The force of the terrorists comes to them precisely from the fact that they have no logic. The others do: it is quick, effective, flawless, without scruples; it is why they "win." If the terrorists had one, they would not make the errors that they do, but they would no longer be terrorists. To demand that they be at the same time illogical, which gives them their power, and 116 Ou r Theater of Cruelty logical tacticians, which would make them suc- cessful, is absurd - again a fantasy of synthesis, and of defense on our part, which allows us to recuperate ourselves in the fury of defeat. Hence the stupidity and the obscenity of all that is reported about the terrorists: everywhere the wish to palm off meaning on them, to exter- minate them with meaning, which is more effec- tive than the bullets of specialized commandoes (and all the while subjecting them elsewhere, in the prisons, to sensory deprivation). It is still this rage for meaning which makes us, with the best will in the world, treat them like idiots incapable of going all the way and blowing up the airplane and the passengers, which makes us want them not to have "won." Not only have they not won, but they have encouraged inordinately the sacred union of all the world forces of repression; they have rein- forced the political order, etc. - let's go all the way - they have killed their Stammheim * com- rades, since if they had not launched and then botched up this operation, the others would still be living. But all this participates in the same con- spiracy of meaning, which amounts to setting an 117 Jean Baudrillard action in contradiction with itself (here to ends that were not desired, or according to a logic which was not its own). Strangulation. II. Stammheim The insoluble polemic on the manner in which Baader and his comrades died is itself obscene, and for the same reason: there is an equal obscenity in wanting to forcibly impose meaning on the highjackers' act and in wanting to restore Baader's death to the order of factual reality. Prin- ciple of meaning as principle of truth: there you have the real life blood of State terrorism. It is to believe that the German government's strategy attains perfection in a single blow: not only does it link together in an almost improvised manner the bungled taking of hostages with the immediately subsequent liquidation of the pris- oners who disturbed it, but does so in such a way (coarse, equivocal, incoherent) that it traps everyone in the hysterical search for truth, which is the best way to abolish the symbolic futility of this death. The highjackers made so many errors at Mogadishu that one can only think that they 118 Our Theater of Cruelty were done "on purpose." They have finally at- tained their objective obliquely, which was the challenge of their own death, the latter summing up the virtual one of all the hostages, and more radically still, that of the power which kills them. For it absolutely must be repeated that the stakes are not to beat power on its own ground, but to oppose another political order of force. One knows nothing about terrorism if one does not see that it is not a question of real violence, nor of opposing one violence to another (which, owing to their disproportion, is absurd, and besides, all real violence, like real order in general, is always on the side of power), but to oppose to the full violence and to the full order a clearly superior model of extermination and virulence operating through emptiness. The secret is to oppose to the order of the real an absolutely imaginary realm, absolutely ineffectual at the level of reality, but whose im- plosive energy absorbs everything real and all the violence of real power which founders there. Such a model is no longer of the order of tran- sgression: repression and transgression are of the 119 Jean Baudrillard old order of the law, that is to say, of the order of a real system in expansion. In such a system, all that comes into contradiction with it, including the violence of its opposite, only makes the ex- pansion accelerate. Here, the virulence comes from the implosion - and the death of the ter- rorists (or of the hostages) is of this implosive order: the abolition of value, of meaning, of the real, at a determined point. This point can be in- finitesimal, and yet provokes a suction, an ab- sorption, a gigantic convection, as could be seen at Mogadishu. Around this tiny point, the whole system of the real condenses, is tetanized, and launches all its anti-bodies. It becomes so dense that it goes beyond its own laws of equilibrium and involutes in its 'own over-effectiveness. At bottom, the profound tactic of simulation (for it's very much a matter of simulation in the terrorist model, and not of real death) is to provoke an ex- cess of reality, and to make the system collapse under an excess of reality. If it is possible then to think that the high- jackers have acted purposefully in order to meet their death, this kind of paradoxical death which 120 Our Theater of Cruelty shines intensely for a moment before falling back into the real, it is posssible to think inversely that the German government itself did not commit so many errors in the Baader affair except towards a well defined end (even without desiring it). It was able to stage Baader's death neatly - he did not do it. Far from seeing there a secondary episode, it must be seen as the key to the situation. By sow- ing this doubt, this deliberate ambiguity concern- ing the facts, it insured that the truth about this death, and not the death itself, became fascinating. Everyone exhausted himself in argu- ment and in attempts at clarification - clarifica- tions reinforced by the theatricality of the event which acts as a gigantic dissuasion of the ter- rorists' execution - everyone, and above all the revolutionaries who wanted strongly to have it that Baader had been "assassinated." They too were vultures of the truth. What's the bloody dif- ference, anyway - suicides or victims of liquida- tion? The difference, of course, is that if they were liquidated and it can be proven, then the masses, guided by the truth of the facts, would know that the German State is fascist, and would mobilize in order to wreak revenge. What a load of rubbish. A death is romantic or it is not. And 121 Jean Baudrillard in the latter case, there is no need for revenge; it is of the imaginary order. What non-sense to fall back into the reality of a contract of revenge and equivalence! The avengers are worth the moralists: always evaluate the price, and have the just price paid. It matters little that the "reali- ty" of this death (the truth about ... ) is stolen from you, since it is not of the order of the real, and therein lies its force. You are the one who depreciates it by wanting to institute it as a fact, as capital with the value of death, and to exhaust it in death, whereas this death at full price, not li- quidated in the equivalence of meaning and vengeance, opens a cycle of vertigo in which the system itself can only come to be implicated in the end, or brutally, through its own death. Against this vertiginous death the system defends itself by setting in place an inverse cycle - a recycling of the truth against the insoluble cycle of death. Such is the inspired manoeuvre of the German government, which consists in delivering through its "calculated" errors an unfinished pro- duct, an unrecoverable truth. Thus everyone will exhaust himself finishing the work, and going to the end of the truth. A subtle incitement to self- management. It is content to produce an event in- 122 Our Theater of Cruelty volving death; others will put the finishing touches on the job. The truth. Even among the very ones who revolt at Baader's death, no one sees through this trap, and all function with the same automatism on the fringe of open complici- ty which all intelligent power contrives to spread around its decisions. Far from harming him, the flaws of Stam- mheim stem from a strategy of simulation by the German State which alone would merit analysis and denunciation. A strategy of sacred union, and not at all moraL against the terrorist violence, but, much more profoundly, a sacred union in the production of truth, of the facts, of the real. Even if this truth explodes (if in fifteen years it is finally established that Baader was col- dly liquidated), it will hardly be a scandal. No power will be frightened by it; if necessary, the creW of leaders will be changed. The price of the truth for power is superficial. On the other hand, the benefits of general mobilization, dissuasion, pacification and mental socialization obtained through this crystalization of the truth are im- mense. A smart operation, under which Baader's death threatens to be buried definitively. 0 123 *** Original page numbering retained. Spelling errors in original marked with [aic!] *** VANISHING POINT Caution: Objects in this mirror may be closer than they appear! Nostalgia born of the immensity of the Texan hills and the sierras of New Mexico: gliding down the freeway, smash hits on the Chrysler stereo, heat wave. Snapshots aren’t enough. We’d need the whole film of the trip in real time, including the unbearable heat and the music. We’d have to replay it all from end to end at home in a darkened room, rediscover the magic of the freeways and the distance and the ice-cold alcohol in the desert and the speed and live it all again on the video at home in real time, not simply for the pleasure of remembering but because the fascination of senseless repetition is already present in the abstraction of the journey. The unfolding of the desert is infinitely close to the timelessness of film... SAN ANTONIO The Mexicans, become Chicanos, act as guides on the visit to El Alamo to laud the heroes of the American nation so valiantly massacred by their ownancestors. But hard as those ancestors fought, the division of labour won out in the end. Today it is their grandchildren and great-grandchildren who are there, on the same battlefield, to hymn the Americans who stole their lands. History is full of ruse and cunning. But so are the Mexicans who have crossed the border clandestinely to come and work here. SALT LAKE CITY Pompous Mormon symmetry. Everywhere marble: flawless, funereal (the Capitol, the organ in the Visitor Center). Yet a Los-Angelic modernity, too -all the requisite gadgetry for a minimalist, extraterrestrial comfort. The Christ-topped dome (all the Christs here are copied from Thorwaldsen’s and look like Bjorn Borg) straight out of Close Encounters: religion as special effects. In fact the whole city has the transparency and supernatural, otherworldly cleanness of a thing from outer space. A symmetrical, luminous, overpowering abstraction. At every intersection in the Tabernacle area - all marble and roses, and evangelical marketing - an electronic cuckoo-clock sings out: such Puritan obsessiveness is astonishing in this heat, in the heart of the desert, alongside this leaden lake, its waters also hyperreal from sheer density of salt. And, beyond the lake, the Great Salt Lake Desert, where they had to invent the speed of prototype cars to cope with the absolute horizontality... But the city itself is like a jewel, with its purity of air and its plunging urban vistas more breathtaking even than those of Los Angeles. What stunning brilliance, what modern veracity these Mormons show, these rich bankers, musicians, international genealogists, polygamists (the Empire State in New York has something of this same funereal Puritanism raised to the nth power). It is the capitalist, transsexual pride of a people of mutants that gives the city its magic, equal and opposite to that of Las Vegas, that great whore on the other side of the desert. MONUMENT VALLEY DEAD HORSE POINT GRAND CANYON Geological - and hence metaphysical - monumentality, by contrast with the physical altitude of ordinary landscapes. Upturned relief patterns, sculpted out by wind, water, and ice, dragging you down into the whirlpool of time, into the remorseless eternity of a slow-motion catastrophe. The very idea of the millions and hundreds of millions of years that were needed peacefully to ravage the surface of the earth here is a perverse one, since it brings with it an awareness of signs originating, long before man appeared, in a sort of pact of wear and erosion struck between the elements. Among this gigantic heap of signs - purely geological in essence - man will have had no significance. The Indians alone perhaps interpreted them - a few of them. And yet they are signs. For the desert only appears uncultivated. This entire Navajo country, the long plateau which leads to the Grand Canyon, the cliffs overlooking Monument Valley, the abysses of Green River are all alive with a magical presence, which has nothing to do with nature (the secret of this whole stretch of country is perhaps that it was once an underwater relief and has retained the surrealist qualities of an ocean bed in the open air). You can understand why it took great magic on the Indians’ part, and a terribly cruel religion, to exorcize such a theoretical grandeur as the desert’s geological and celestial occurrence, to live up to such a backdrop. What is man if the signs that predate him have such power? A human race has to invent sacrifices equal to the natural cataclysmic order that surrounds it. It is perhaps these reliefs, because they are no longer natural, which givethe best idea of what a culture is. Monument Valley: blocks of language suddenly rising high, then subjected to a pitiless erosion, ancient sedimentations that owe their depth to wear (meaning is born out of the erosion of words, significations are born out of the erosion of signs), and that are today destined to become, like all that is cultivated - like all culture -natural parks. SALT LAKE CITY: the world genealogical archives, presided over in the depths of the desert caves by those rich-living, puritanical conquistadors, the Mormons, and, alongside, the Bonneville track on the immaculate surface of the Great Salt Lake Desert, where prototype cars achieve the highest speeds in the world. Patronymic genesis as the depth of time, and the speed of sound as pure superficiality. ALAMOGORDO: the first atomic-bomb test against the backdrop of White Sands, the pale blue backcloth of the mountains and hundreds of miles of white sand - the blinding artificial light of the bomb against the blinding light of the ground. TORREY CANYON: the Salk Institute, sanctuary of DNA and all the Nobel prizewinners for biology. There all the future biological commandments are being devised, within that architecture copied from the palace of Minos, its white marble staring out over the immensity of the Pacific. . . Extraordinary sites, capitals of fiction become reality. Sublime, trans- political sites of extraterritoriality, combining as they do the earth’s undamaged geological grandeur with a sophisticated, nuclear, orbital, computer technology. I went in search of astral America*, not social and cultural America, but the America of the empty, absolute freedom of the freeways, not the deep America of mores and mentalities, but the America of desert speed, of motels and mineral surfaces. I looked for it in the speed of the screenplay, in the indifferent reflex of television, in the film of days and nights projected across an empty space, in the marvellously affectless succession of signs, images, faces, and ritual acts on the road; looked for what was nearest to the nuclear and enucleated universe, a universe which is virtually our own, right down to its European cottages. I sought the finished form of the future catastrophe of the social in geology, in that upturning of depth that can be seen in the striated spaces, the reliefs of salt and stone, the canyons where the fossil river flows down, the immemorial abyss of slowness that shows itself in erosion and geology. I even looked for it in the verticality of the great cities. I knew all about this nuclear form, this future catastrophe when I was still in Paris, of course. But to understand it, you have to take to the road, to that travelling which achieves what Virilio calls the aesthetics of disappearance. For the mental desert form expands before your very eyes, and this is the purified form of social desertification. Disaffection finds its pure form in the barrenness of speed. All that is cold and dead in desertification or social enucleation rediscovers its contemplative form here in the heat of the desert. Here in the transversality of the desert and the irony of geology, the transpolitical finds its generic, mental space. The inhumanity of our ulterior, asocial, superficial world immediately finds its aesthetic form here, its ecstatic form. For the desert is simply that: an ecstatic critique of culture, an ecstatic form of disappearance. * ‘L’Amerique siderale’: this term and its variant forms have been rendered throughout by ‘astral’ or the less familiar ‘sidereal’, according to context. [Tr.] The grandeur of deserts derives from their being, in their aridity, the negative of the earth’s surface and of our civilized humours. They are places where humours and fluids become rarefied, where the air is so pure that the influence of the stars descends direct from the constellations. And, with the extermination of the desert Indians, an even earlier stage than that of anthropology became visible: a mineralogy, a geology, a sidereality, an inhuman facticity, an aridity that drives out the artificial scruples of culture, a silence that exists nowhere else. The silence of the desert is a visual thing, too. A product of the gaze that stares out and finds nothing to reflect it. There can be no silence up in the mountains, since their very contours roar. And for there to be silence, time itself has to attain a sort of horizontality; there has to be no echo of time in the future, but simply a sliding of geological strata one upon the other giving out nothing more than a fossil murmur. Desert: luminous, fossilized network of an inhuman intelligence, of a radical indifference - the indifference not merely of the sky, but of the geological undulations, where the metaphysical passions of space and time alone crystallize. Here the terms of desire are turned upside down each day, and night annihilates them. But wait for the dawn to rise, with the awakening of the fossil sounds, the animal silence. Speed creates pure objects. It is itself a pure object, since it cancels out the ground and territorial reference-points, since it runs ahead of time to annul time itself, since it moves more quickly than its own cause and obliterates that cause by outstripping it. Speed is the triumph of effect over cause, the triumph of instantaneity over time as depth, the triumph of the surface arid pure objectality over the profundity of desire. Speed creates a space of initiation, which may be lethal; its only rule is to leave no trace behind. Triumph of forgetting over memory, an uncultivated, amnesic intoxi-cation. The superficiality and reversibility of a pure object in the pure geometry of the desert. Driving like this produces a kind of invisibility, transparency, or transversality in things, simply by emptying them out. It is a sort of slow-motion suicide, death by an extenuation of forms - the delectable form of their disappearance. Speed is not a vegetal thing. It is nearer to the mineral, to refraction through a crystal, and it is already the site of a catastrophe, of a squandering of time. Perhaps, though, its fascination is simply that of the void. There is no seduction here, for seduction requires a secret. Speed is simply the rite that initiates us into emptiness: a nostalgic desire for forms to revert to immobility, concealed beneath the very intensification of their mobility. Akin to the nostalgia for living forms that haunts geometry. Still, there is a violent contrast here, in this country, between the growing abstractness of a nuclear universe and a primary, visceral, unbounded* vitality, springing not from rootedness, but from the lack of roots, a metabolic vitality, in sex and bodies, as well as in work and in buying and selling. Deep down, the US, with its space, its technological refinement, its bluff good conscience, even in those spaces which it opens up for simulation, is the only remaining primitive society. The fascinating thing is to travel through it as though it were the primitive society of the future, a society of complexity, hybridity, and the greatest intermingling, of a ritualism that is ferocious but whose superficial diversity lends it beauty, a society inhabited by a total metasocial fact with unforeseeable consequences, whose immanence is breathtaking, yet lacking a past through which to reflect on this, and therefore fundamentally primitive. . . Its primitivism has passed into the hyperbolic, inhuman character of a universe that is beyond us, that far outstrips its own moral, social, or ecological rationale. Only Puritans could have invented and developed this ecological andbiological morality based on preservation - and therefore on discrimination -which is profoundly racial in nature. Everything becomes an overprotected nature reserve, so protected indeed that there is talk today of denaturalizing Yosemite to give it back to Nature, as has happened with the Tasaday in the Philippines. A Puritan obsession with origins in the very place where the ground itself has already gone. An obsession with finding a niche, a contact, precisely at the point where everything unfolds in an astral indifference. There is a sort of miracle in the insipidity of artificial paradises, so long as they achieve the greatness of an entire (un)culture. In America, space lends a sense of grandeur even to the insipidity of the suburbs and ‘funky towns’. The desert is everywhere, preserving insignificance. A desert where the miracle of the car, of ice and whisky is daily re-enacted: a marvel of easy living mixed with the fatality of the desert. A miracle of obscenity that is genuinely American: a miracle of total availability, of the transparency of all functions in space, though this latter nonetheless remains unfathomable in its vastness and can only be exorcised by speed. The Italian miracle: that of stage and scene. The American miracle: that of the obscene. The profusion of sense, as against the deserts of meaninglessness. It is metamorphic forms that are magical. Not the sylvan, vegetal forest, but the petrified, mineralized forest. The salt desert, whiter than snow, flatter than the sea. The effect of monumentality, geometry, and architecture where nothing has been designed or planned. Canyonsland, Split Mountain. Or the opposite: the amorphous reliefless relief of Mud Hills, the voluptuous, fossilized, monotonously undulating lunar relief of ancient lake beds. The white swell of White Sands. . . It takes this surreality of the elements toeliminate nature’s picturesque qualities, just as it takes the metaphysics of speed to eliminate the natural picturesqueness of travel. In fact the conception of a trip without any objective and which is, as a result, endless, only develops gradually for me. I reject the picturesque tourist round, the sights, even the landscapes (only their abstraction remains, in the prism of the scorching heat). Nothing is further from pure travelling than tourism or holiday travel. That is why it is best done in the extensive banality of deserts, or in the equally desert-like banality of a metropolis - not at any stage regarded as places of pleasure or culture, but seen televisually as scenery, as scenarios. That is why it is best done in extreme heat, the orgasmic form of bodily deterritorialization. The acceleration of molecules in the heat contributes to a barely perceptible evaporation of meaning. It is not the discovery of local customs that counts, but discovering the immorality of the space you have to travel through, and this is on a quite different plane. It is this, together with the sheer distance, and the deliverance from the social, that count. Here in the most moral society there is, space is truly immoral. Here in the most conformist society, the dimensions are immoral. It is this immorality that makes distance light and the journey infinite, that cleanses the muscles of their tiredness. Driving is a spectacular form of amnesia. Everything is to be discovered, everything to be obliterated. Admittedly, there is the primal shock of the deserts and the dazzle of California, but when this is gone, the secondary brilliance of the journey begins, that of the excessive, pitiless distance, the infinity of anonymous faces and distances, or of certain miraculous geological formations, which ultimately testify to no human will, while keeping intact an image of upheaval. This form of travel admits of no exceptions: when it runs up against a known face, a familiar landscape, or some decipherable message, the spell is broken: the amnesic, ascetic, asymptotic charm of disappearance succumbs to affect and worldly semiology. This sort of travel creates its own peculiar type of event and innervation, so it also has its own special form of fatigue. Like a fibrillation of muscles, striated by the excess of heat and speed, by the excess of things seen or read, of places passed through and forgotten. The defibrillation of the body overloaded with empty signs, functional gestures, the blinding brilliance of the sky, and somnabulistic [sic!] distances, is a very slow process. Things suddenly become lighter, as culture, our culture, becomes more rarefied. And this spectral form of civilization which the Americans have invented, an ephemeral form so close to vanishing point, suddenly seems the best adapted to the probability - the probability only - of the life that lies in store for us. The form that dominates the American West, and doubtless all of American culture, is a seismic form: a fractal, interstitial culture, born of a rift with the Old World, a tactile, fragile, mobile, superficial culture - you have to follow its own rules to grasp how it works: seismic shifting, soft technologies. The only question in this journey is: how far can we go in the extermination of meaning, how far can we go in the non-referential desert form without cracking up and, of course, still keep alive the esoteric charm of disappearance? A theoretical question here materialized in the objective conditions of a journey which is no longer a journey and therefore carries with it a fundamental rule: aim for the point of no return. This is the key. And the crucial moment is that brutal instant which reveals that the journey has no end, that there is no longer any reason for it to come to an end. Beyond a certain point, it is movement itself that changes. Movement which moves through space of its own volition changes into an absorption by space itself - end of resistance, end of the scene of the journey as such (exactly asthe jet engine is no longer an energy of space- penetration, but propels itself by creating a vacuum in front of it that sucks it forward, instead of supporting itself, as in the traditional model, upon the air’s resistance). In this way, the centrifugal, eccentric point is reached where movement produces the vacuum that sucks you in. This moment of vertigo is also the moment of potential collapse. Not so much from the tiredness generated by the distance and the heat, as from the irreversible advance into the desert of time. Tomorrow is the first day of the rest of your life. NEW YORK Aeronautic missionary of the silent majorities, I jump with cat-like tread from one airport to the other. Now it’s the blazing woods of New Hampshire, casting a fleeting reflection in the mirror of New England. Yesterday, it was the steepling gentleness of skyscrapers. Tomorrow it will be Minneapolis with its sweet-sounding name, its gossamer string of vowels, half-Greek, half- Cheyenne, evoking a radiating geometric pattern, at the edge of the ice-sheets, at the horizon of the inhabited world... Speaking of the silence of the masses and the end of history, and casting an eye over the immensity and radiance of the lake. A biting wind blows over it, away to the east where night is falling. Planes pass overhead, silent as the wind, behind the windowpanes of the hotel, and the first neon signs begin to roll slowly, above the city. What an amazing place America is! All around is Indian summer, its mildness presaging snow. But where are the ten thousand lakes, the Utopian dream of a hellenistic city on the edge of the Rockies? Minneapolis, Minneapolis! After the patrician elegance and feminine gentleness of the Indian summer in Wisconsin, Minneapolis is merely a rural agglomeration, simply waiting in darkness amid its silos and hunting grounds for the winter and the cold on which it prides itself. But in the depths of this real America, there is the Commodore bar, with the finest art deco in the world, where Fitzgerald, they say, drank every evening. I drink there too. Tomorrow I shall be carried directly by plane to the opposite extreme, opposite in terms of light, surface area, racial mix, aesthetics, and power - to the city that is heir to all other cities at once. Heir to Athens, Alexandria, Persepolis: New York. NEW YORK More sirens here, day and night. The cars are faster, the advertisements more aggressive. This is wall-to-wall prostitutiion [sic!]. And total electric light too. And the game - all games - gets more intense. It’s always like this when you’re getting near the centre of the world. But the people smile. Actually they smile more and more, though never to other people, always to themselves. The terrifying diversity of faces, their strangeness, strained as they all are into unbelievable expressions. The masks old age or death conferred in archaic cultures are worn here by youngsters of twenty or twelve. But this reflects the city as a whole. The beauty other cities only acquired over centuries has been achieved by New York in fifty years. Plumes of smoke, reminiscent of girls wringing out their hair after bathing. Afro or pre-Raphaelite hairstyles. Run-of-the-mill, multiracial. City of Pharoahs [sic!], all obelisks and needles. The blocks around Central Park are like flying buttresses, lending the huge park the appearance of a hanging garden.It isn’t clouds that are fleecy here, but brains. Clouds float over the city like cerebral hemispheres driven by the wind. The people have cirrus clouds in their heads or coming out of their eyes, like the spongy vapours that rise from earth cracked by hot rains. Sexual solitude of clouds in the sky; linguistic solitude of men on the earth. The number of people here who think alone, sing alone, and eat and talk alone in the streets is mind-boggling. And yet they don’t add up. Quite the reverse. They subtract from each other and their resemblance to one another is uncertain. Yet there is a certain solitude like no other - that of the man preparing his meal in public on a wall, or on the hood of his car, or along a fence, alone. You see that all the time here. It is the saddest sight in the world. Sadder than destitution, sadder than the beggar is the man who eats alone in public. Nothing more contradicts the laws of man or beast, for animals always do each other the honour of sharing or disputing each other’s food. He who eats alone is dead (but not he who drinks alone. Why is this?). Why do people live in New York? There is no relationship between them. Except for an inner electricity which results from the simple fact of their being crowded together. A magical sensation of contiguity and attraction for an artificial centrality. This is what makes it a self-attracting universe, which there is no reason to leave. There is no human reason to be here, except for the sheer ecstasy of being crowded together. The beauty of the Black and Puerto Rican women of New York. Apart from the sexual stimulation produced by the crowding together of so many races, it must be said that black, the pigmentation of the dark races, is like anatural make-up that is set off by the artificial kind to produce a beauty which is not sexual, but sublime and animal - a beauty which the pale faces so desperately lack. Whiteness seems an extenuation of physical adornment, a neutrality which, perhaps by that very token, claims all the exoteric powers of the Word, but ultimately will never possess the esoteric and ritual potency of artifice. In New York there is this double miracle: each of the great buildings and each of the ethnic groups dominates or has dominated the city - after its own fashion. Here crowdedness lends sparkle to each of the ingredients in the mix whereas elsewhere it tends to cancel out differences. In Montreal, all the same elements are present - ethnic groups, buildings, and space on the grand American scale - but the sparkle and violence of American cities are missing. Clouds spoil our European skies. Compared with the immense skies of America and their thick clouds, our little fleecy skies and little fleecy clouds resemble our fleecy thoughts, which are never thoughts of wide open spaces. . . In Paris, the sky never takes off. It doesn’t soar above us. It remains caught up in the backdrop of sickly buildings, all living in each other’s shade, as though it were a little piece of private property. It is not, as here in the great capital New York, the vertiginous glass facade reflecting each building to the others. Europe has never been a continent. You can see that by its skies. As soon as you set foot in America, you feel the presence of an entire continent - space there is the very form of thought. By contrast with the American ‘downtown areas’ and their blocks of skyscrapers, la Defense has forfeited the architectural benefits of verticality and excess by squeezing its high-rise blocks into an Italian-style setting, intoa dosed theatre bounded by a ring-road. It is very much a garden à la française: a bunch of buildings with a ribbon around it. All this has closed off the possibility that these monsters might engender others to infinity, that they might battle it out within a space rendered dramatic by their very competition (New York, Chicago, Houston, Seattle, Toronto). It is in such a space that the pure architectural object is born, an object beyond the control of architects, which roundly repudiates the city and its uses, repudiates the interests of the collectivity and individuals and persists in its own madness. That object has no equivalent, except perhaps the arrogance of the cities of the Renaissance. No, architecture should not be humanized. Anti-architecture, the true sort (not the kind you find in Arcosanti, Arizona, which gathers together all the ‘soft’ technologies in the heart of the desert), the wild, inhuman type that is beyond the measure of man was made here - made itself here - in New York, without considerations of setting, well-being, or ideal ecology. It opted for hard technologies, exaggerated all dimensions, gambled on heaven and hell. . . Eco-architecture, eco- society . . . this is the gentle hell of the Roman Empire in its decline. Modern demolition is truly wonderful. As a spectacle it is the opposite of a rocket launch. The twenty-storey block remains perfectly vertical as it slides towards the centre of the earth. It falls straight, with no loss of its upright bearing, like a tailor’s dummy falling through a trap-door, and its own surface area absorbs the rubble. What a marvellous modern art form this is, a match for the firework displays of our childhood. They say the streets are alive in Europe, but dead in America. They are wrong. Nothing could be more intense, electrifying, turbulent, and vital than the streets of New York. They are filled with crowds, bustle, and advertisements, each by turns aggressive or casual. There are millions of people in the streets, wandering, carefree, violent, as if they had nothing better to do - and doubtless they have nothing else to do - than produce the permanent scenario of the city. There is music everywhere; the activity is intense, relatively violent, and silent (it is not the agitated, theatrical activity you find in Italy). The streets and avenues never empty, but the neat, spacious geometry of the city is far removed from the thronging intimacy of the narrow streets of Europe. In Europe, the street only lives in sudden surges, in historic moments of revolution and barricades. At other times people move along briskly, no one really hangs around (no one wanders any more). It is the same with European cars. No one actually lives in them; there isn’t enough space. The cities, too, do not have enough space, or rather that space is deemed public and bears all the marks of the public arena, which forbids you to cross it or wander around it as though it were a desert or some indifferent area. The American street has not, perhaps, known these historic moments, but it is always turbulent, lively, kinetic, and cinematic, like the country itself, where the specifically historical and political stage counts for little, but where change, whether spurred by technology, racial differences, or the media, assumes virulent forms: its violence is the very violence of the way of life. Such is the whirl of the city, so great its centrifugal force, that it would take superhuman strength to envisage living as a couple and sharing someone else’s life in New York. Only tribes, gangs, mafia families, secret societies, and perverse communities can survive, not couples. This is the anti-Ark. Inthe first Ark, the animals came in two by two to save the species from the great flood. Here in this fabulous Ark, each one comes in alone - it’s up to him or her each evening to find the last survivors for the last party. In New York, the mad have been set free. Let out into the city, they are difficult to tell apart from the rest of the punks, junkies, addicts, winoes, or down-and-outs who inhabit it. It is difficult to see why a city as crazy as this one would keep its mad in the shadows, why it would withdraw from circulation specimens of a madness which has in fact, in its various forms, taken hold of the whole city. ‘Breakdancing’ is a feat of acrobatic gymnastics. Only at the end do you realize it actually was dancing, when the dancer freezes into a lazy, languid pose (elbow on the ground, head nonchalantly resting in the palm of the hand, the pose you see on Etruscan tombs). The way they suddenly come to rest like this is reminiscent of Chinese opera. But the Chinese warrior comes to a halt at the height of the action in a heroic gesture, whereas the breakdancer stops at the slack point in his movements and the gesture is derisive. You might say that in curling up and spiralling around on the ground like this, they seem to be digging a hole for themselves within their own bodies, from which to stare out in the ironic, indolent pose of the dead. I would never have believed that the New York marathon could move you to tears. It really is the end-of-the-world show. Can we speak of suffering freely entered into as we might speak of a state of servitude freely entered into? In driving rain, with helicopters circling overhead and the crowd cheering, wearing aluminium foil capes and squinting at their stop-watches, orbare-chested, their eyes rolling skywards, they are all seeking death, that death by exhaustion that was the fate of the first Marathon man some two thousand years ago. And he, let us not forget, was carrying a message of victory to Athens. They also dream no doubt of bringing a victory message, but there are too many of them and their message has lost all meaning: it is merely the message of their arrival, at the end of their exertions, the twilight message of a futile, superhuman effort. Collectively, they might rather seem to be bringing the message of a catastrophe for the human race, which you can see becoming more and more decrepit by the hour as the runners come in, from the competitive, athletic types who arrive first to the wrecks who are literally carried to the finishing line by their friends, or the handicapped who do the race in their wheelchairs. There are 17,000 runners and you can’t help thinking back to the Battle of Marathon, where there weren’t even 17,000 soldiers in the field. There are 17,000 of them and each one runs alone, without even a thought for victory, but simply in order to feel alive. ‘We won’, gasped the man from Marathon as he expired. 1 did it!’, sighs the exhausted marathon runner of New York as he collapses on the grass in Central Park. I DID IT! The slogan of a new form of advertising activity, of autistic performance, a pure and empty form, a challenge to one’s own self that has replaced the Promethean ecstasy of competition, effort, and success. The New York marathon has become a sort of international symbol of such fetishistic performance, of the mania for an empty victory, the joy engendered by a feat that is of no consequence. I ran the New York marathon: I did it!’ I conquered Annapurna: ‘I did it!’The moon landing is the same kind of thing: ‘We did it!’ The event was ultimately not really so surprising; it was an event pre-programmed into the course of science and progress. We did it. But it has not revived the millenarian dream of conquering space. In a sense, it has exhausted it. Carrying out any kind of programme produces the same sense of futility that comes from doing anything merely to prove to yourself that you can do it: having a child, climbing a mountain, making some sexual conquest, committing suicide. The marathon is a form of demonstrative suicide, suicide as advertising: it is running to show you are capable of getting every last drop of energy out of yourself, to prove it . . . to prove what? That you are capable of finishing. Graffiti carry the same message. They simply say: I’m so-and-so and I exist! They are free publicity for existence. Do we continually have to prove to ourselves that we exist? A strange sign of weakness, harbinger of a new fanaticism for a faceless performance, endlessly self-evident. MYSTIC TRANSPORTATION INCORPORATED A blue-green lorry with gleaming chromework is going down Seventh Avenue in the early morning sun, just after a snowfall. It bears on its sides, in gold metallic lettering, the words ‘Mystic Transportation’. It sums up the whole of New York and its mystical view of decadence. Every special effect can be found here, from sublime verticality to decay on the ground, all the special effects of the mixing of races and empires. This is the fourth dimension of the city. In years to come cities will stretch out horizontally and will be non-urban (Los Angeles). After that, they will bury themselves in the ground and will no longer even have names. Everything will become infrastructure bathed inartificial light and energy. The brilliant superstructure, the crazy verticality will have disappeared. New York is the final fling of this baroque verticality, this centrifugal excentricity, before the horizontal dismantling arrives, and the subterranean implosion that will follow. With the marvellous complicity of its entire population, New York acts out its own catastrophe as a stage play. And this is not an effect of its decadence, but of its own power, to which there is, of course, no threat. In fact, this absence of threat is its power. Its density, its surface electricity rule out any thought of war. That life begins again each morning is a kind of miracle, considering how much energy was expended the day before. Its voltage protects it, like a galvanic dome, from all external threats - though not from internal accidents like the black-out of ‘76. Yet the scale of these makes them world events and simply adds further to the city’s glory. This centrality and eccentricity can only create a crazed sense of its own end, which the New York ‘scene’ aesthetically transcribes in its follies and its violent expressionism, and which the whole city collectively cultivates in its technical frenzy for the vertical, its constant acceleration of the banal, the liveliness of its faces, whether happy or wretched, and the insolence of its sacrifice of humans to pure circulation. No one looks at you, caught up as they all are in their passionate efforts to carry off their own impersonal roles. There are no cops in New York -elsewhere they are there to give a modern, urban look to cities that are still semi-rural (Paris is a good example). Here, urbanization has reached such a pitch that there is no longer any need to express it or give it a political character. Anyway, New York is no longer a political city and demonstrations by its various ideological groups are rare and invariably derisory (the ethnic groups express themselves through festivals and the racial demonstration of their presence). New York’s violence is not a violence of social relations, but of all relations, and it is exponential. Sexuality itself has to some extent been left behind as a form of expression. Even though it is everywhere on display, it no longer has the time to realize itself in human love- relationships. It evaporates into the promiscuity of each passing moment, into a multiplicity of more ephemeral forms of contact. You rediscover a feeling of glory in New York, in the sense that you feel wreathed in the general energy of the place - what you are part of here is not the lugubrious spectacle of change, as you find it in Europe, but the aesthetic form of a mutation. We in Europe possess the art of thinking, of analysing things and reflecting on them. No one disputes our historical subtlety and conceptual imagination. Even the great minds across the Atlantic envy us in this regard. But the resounding truths, the realities of genuinely great moment today are to be found along the Pacific seaboard or in Manhattan. It has to be said that New York and Los Angeles are at the centre of the world, even if we find the idea somehow both exciting and disenchanting. We are a desperately long way behind the stupidity and the mutational character, the naive extravagance and the social, racial, moral, morphological, and architectural excentricity of their society. No one is capable of analysing it, least of all the American intellectuals shut away on their campuses, dramatically cut off from the fabulous concrete mythology developing all around them. It is a world completely rotten with wealth, power, senility, indifference, puritanism and mental hygiene, poverty and waste, technological futility and aimless violence, and yet I cannot help but feel it has about it something of the dawning of the universe. Perhaps because the entire world continues to dream of New York, even as New York dominates and exploits it.At 30,000 feet and 600 miles per hour, I have beneath me the ice-floes of Greenland, the Indes Galantes in my earphones, Catherine Deneuve on the screen, and an old man - a Jew or an Armenian - asleep on my lap. ‘Yes, I feel all the violence of love. . .’ sings the sublime voice, from one time zone to the next. The people in the plane are asleep. Speed knows nothing of the violence of love. Between one night and the next, the one we came from and the one we shall land in, there will have been only four hours daylight. But the sublime voice, the voice of insomnia travels even more quickly. It moves through the freezing, trans-oceanic atmosphere, runs along the long lashes of the actress, along the horizon, violet where the sun is rising, as we fly along in our warm coffin of a jet, and finally fades away somewhere off the coast of Iceland. The journey is over.   ASTRAL AMERICA Astral America. The lyrical nature of pure circulation. As against the melancholy of European analyses. The direct star-blast from vectors and signals, from the vertical and the spatial. As against the fevered distance of the cultural gaze. Joy in the collapse of metaphor, which here in Europe we merely grieve over. The exhilaration of obscenity, the obscenity of obviousness, the obviousness of power, the power of simulation. As against our disappointed virginity, our chasms of affectation. Sideration. Star-blasted, horizontally by the car, altitudinally by the plane, electronically by television, geologically by deserts, stereolithically by the megalopoloi, transpolitically by the power game, the power museum that America has become for the whole world. For me there is no truth of America. I ask of the Americans only that they be Americans. I do not ask them to be intelligent, sensible, original. I ask themonly to populate a space incommensurate with my own, to be for me the highest astral point, the finest orbital space. Why should I go and decentralize myself in France, in the ethnic and the local, which are merely the shreds and vestiges of centrality? I want to excentre myself, to become eccentric, but I want to do so in a place that is the centre of the world. And, in this sense, the latest fast-food outlet, the most banal suburb, the blandest of giant American cars or the most insignificant cartoon-strip majorette is more at the centre of the world than any of the cultural manifestations of old Europe. This is the only country which gives you the opportunity to be so brutally naive: things, faces, skies, and deserts are expected to be simply what they are. This is the land of the ‘just as it is’. America always gives me a feeling of real asceticism. Culture, politics - and sexuality too - are seen exclusively in terms of the desert, which here assumes the status of a primal scene. Everything disappears before that desert vision. Even the body, by an ensuing effect of undernourishment, takes on a transparent form, a lightness near to complete disappearance. Everything around me suffers this same desertification. But this radical experimentation is the only thing that enables me to get through and produces that astral quality I have not found anywhere else. America is neither dream nor reality. It is a hyperreality It is a hyperreality because it is a Utopia which has behaved from the very beginning as though it were already achieved. Everything here is real and pragmatic, and yet it is all the stuff of dreams too. It may be that the truth of America can only be seen by a European, since he alone will discover here the perfect simulacrum - that of the immanence and material transcription of all values. The Americans, for their part, have no sense of simulation. They are themselves simulation in its most developed state, but they have no language in which to describe it, since they themselves are the model. As a result, they are the ideal material for an analysis of all the possible variants of the modern world. No more and no less in fact than were primitive societies in their day. The same mythical and analytic excitement that made us look towards those earlier societies today impels us to look in the direction of America. With the same passion and the same prejudices. In reality, you do not, as I had hoped, get any distance on Europe from here. You do not acquire a fresh angle on it. When you turn around, it has quite simply disappeared. The point is that there is really no need to adopt a critical stance on Europe from here. That is something you can do in Europe. And what is there to criticize which has not been criticized a thousand times before? What you have to do is enter the fiction of America, enter America as fiction. It is, indeed, on this fictive basis that it dominates the world. Even if every detail of America were insignificant, America is something that is beyond us all. . . America is a giant hologram, in the sense that information concerning the whole is contained in each of its elements. Take the tiniest little place in the desert, any old street in a Mid-West town, a parking lot, a Californian house, a BurgerKing [sic!] or a Studebaker, and you have the whole of the US - South, North, East, or West. Holographic also in that it has the coherent light of the laser, the homogeneity of the single elements scanned by the same beams. From the visual and plastic viewpoints too: things seem to be made of a more unreal substance; they seem to turn and move in a void as if by a special lighting effect, a fine membrane you pass through without noticing it. This is obviously true of the desert. It is also the case with Las Vegas and advertising, and even the activities of the people, public relations, and everyday electronics all stand out with the plasticity and simplicity of a beam of light. The hologram is akin to the world of phantasy. It is a three-dimensional dream and you can enter it as you would a dream. Everything depends on the existence of the ray of light bearing the objects. If it is interrupted, all the effects are dispersed, and reality along with it. You do indeed get the impression that America is made up of a fantastic switching between similar elements, and that everything is only held together by a thread of light, a laser beam, scanning out American reality before our eyes. In America the spectral does not refer to phantoms or to dancing ghosts, but to the spectrum into which light disperses. On the aromatic hillsides of Santa Barbara, the villas are all like funeral homes. Between the gardenias and the eucalyptus trees, among the profusion of plant genuses and the monotony of the human species, lies the tragedy of a Utopian dream made reality. In the very heartland of wealth and liberation, you always hear the same question: ‘What are you doing after the orgy?’ What do you do when everything is available - sex, flowers, the stereotypes of life and death? This is America’s problem and, through America, it has become the whole world’s problem. All dwellings have something of the grave about them, but here the fake serenity is complete. The unspeakable house plants, lurking everywhere like the obsessive fear of death, the picture windows looking like Snow White’s glass coffin, the clumps of pale, dwarf flowers stretched out in patches like sclerosis, the proliferation of technical gadgetry inside the house, beneath it, around it, like drips in an intensive care ward, the TV, stereo, and video which provide communication with the beyond, the car (or cars) that connect one up to that great shoppers’ funeral parlour, the super- market, and, lastly, the wife and children, as glowing symptoms of success . . . everything here testifies to death having found its ideal home. The microwave, the waste disposal, the orgasmic elasticity of the carpets: this soft, resort-style civilization irresistibly evokes the end of the world. All their activities here have a surreptitious end-of-the-world feel to them: these Californian scholars with monomaniacal passions for things French or Marxist, the various sects obsessively concerned with chastity or crime, these joggers sleepwalking in the mist like shadows that have escaped from Plato’s cave, the very real mental defectives or mongols let out of the psychiatric hospitals (this letting loose of the mad into the city seems a sure sign of the end of the world, the loosing of the seals of the Apocalypse), these obese individuals who have escaped from the hormone laboratories of their own bodies, and these drilling platforms - ‘oil sanctuaries’ - keeping watch in the night, like grand casinos, or extraterrestrial spacecraft. Ravishing hyperrealism Ecstatic asceticism Multi-process tracking shot Interactive multi-dimensionality Mind-blowing Western Digitals Body Building Incorporated Mileage unlimited Channel Zero Seedy bar in Santa Barbara. The billiard player’s red braces. Foucault, Sartre, and Orson Welles all standing together at the counter, talking to each other, strangely convincing, strikingly like the originals. ‘Cocktail scenery.’ The smell of violence, the stale odour of beer. ‘Hustling is prohibited.’ Sex, beach, and mountains. Sex and beach, beach and mountains. Mountains and sex. A few concepts. Sex and concepts. ‘Just a life.’ Everything is destined to reappear as simulation. Landscapes as photography, women as the sexual scenario, thoughts as writing, terrorism as fashion and the media, events as television. Things seem only to exist by virtue of this strange destiny. You wonder whether the world itself isn’t just here to serve as advertising copy in some other world. When the only physical beauty is created by plastic surgery, the only urban beauty by landscape surgery, the only opinion by opinion poll surgery. . . and now, with genetic engineering, along comes plastic surgery for the whole human species. This is a culture which sets up specialized institutes so that people’s bodies can come together and touch, and, at the same time, invents pans in which the water does not touch the bottom of the pan, which is made of a substance so homogeneous, dry, and artificial that not a single drop sticks to it, just like those bodies intertwined in ‘feeling’ and therapeutic love, which do not touch - not even for a moment. This is called interface or interaction. It has replaced face- to-face contact and action. It is also called communication, because these things really do communicate: the miracle is that the pan bottom communicates its heat to the water without touching it, in a sort of remote boiling process, in the same way as one body communicates its fluid, its erotic potential, to another without that other ever being seduced or evendisturbed, by a sort of molecular capillary action. The code of separation has worked so well that they have even managed to separate the water from the pan and to make the pan transmit its heat as a message, or to make one body transmit its desire to the other as a message, as a fluid to be decoded. This is called information and it has wormed its way into everything, like a phobic, maniacal leitmotiv, which affects sexual relations as well as kitchen implements. Other examples of this mania for asepsis: The Getty museum where old paintings look new, bleached and gleaming, cleansed of all patina and craquelure, with an artificial lustre that echoes the fake Pompeian decor all around them. In Philadelphia, a radical sect named ‘MOVE’, with a bizarre set of rules, including one forbidding both the practice of autopsy and the removal of rubbish, is cleared out by the police, who kill eleven people by fire and burn down thirty adjacent houses, including those (the irony of it!) of all the neighbours who had called for the sect to be removed. This, too, is a clean-up operation. They are getting rid of rubbish and patina, getting back to an original state of cleanliness, restoring. ‘Keep America clean.’ And that smile everyone gives you as they pass, that friendly contraction of the jaws triggered by human warmth. It is the eternal smile of communication, the smile through which the child becomes aware of the presence of others, or struggles desperately with the problem of their presence. It is the equivalent of the primal scream of man alone in the world. Whether I am right in all this or not, they certainly do smile at you here, though neither from courtesy, nor from an effort to charm. This smile signifies only the need to smile. It is a bit like the Cheshire Cat’s grin: it continues to float on faces long after all emotion has disappeared. A smile available at any moment, but half-scared to exist, to give itself away. Noulterior motive lurks behind it, but it keeps you at a distance. It is part of the general cryogenization of emotions. It is, indeed, the smile the dead man will wear in his funeral home, as he clings to a hope of maintaining contact even in the next world. The smile of immunity, the smile of advertising: ‘This country is good. I am good. We are the best’. It is also Reagan’s smile - the culmination of the self-satisfaction of the entire American nation - which is on the way to becoming the sole principle of government. An autoprophetic smile, like all signs in advertising. Smile and others will smile back. Smile to show how transparent, how candid you are. Smile if you have nothing to say. Most of all, do not hide the fact you have nothing to say nor your total indifference to others. Let this emptiness, this profound indifference shine out spontaneously in your smile. Give your emptiness and indifference to others, light up your face with the zero degree of joy and pleasure, smile, smile, smile. . . Americans may have no identity, but they do have wonderful teeth. And it works. With this smile Reagan obtains a much wider consensus than any that could be achieved by a Kennedy with mere reason or political intelligence. The recourse to a pure form of compliment, be it animal or infantile, is much more successful and the whole American population comes together in this toothpaste effect. No idea - not even the nation’s moral values in their entirety - could ever have produced such a result. Reagan’s credibility is exactly equal to his transparency and the nullity of his smile. The skateboarder with his Walkman, the intellectual working on his word- processor, the Bronx breakdancer whirling frantically in the Roxy, the jogger and the body-builder: everywhere, whether in regard to the body or the mental faculties, you find the same blank solitude, the same narcissistic refraction. This omnipresent cult of the body is extraordinary. It is the only object on which everyone is made to concentrate, not as a source of pleasure, but as an object of frantic concern, in the obsessive fear of failure or substandard performance, a sign and an anticipation of death, that death to which no one can any longer give a meaning, but which everyone knows has at all times to be prevented. The body is cherished in the perverse certainty of its uselessness, in the total certainty of its non-resurrection. Now, pleasure is an effect of the resurrection of the body, by which it exceeds that hormonal, vascular and dietetic equilibrium in which we seek to imprison it, that exorcism by fitness and hygiene. So the body has to be made to forget pleasure as present grace, to forget its possible metamorphosis into other forms of appearance and become dedicated to the Utopian preservation of a youth that is, in any case, already lost. For the body which doubts its own existence is already half-dead, and the current semi-yogic, semi-ecstatic cult of the body is a morbid preoccupation. The care taken of the body while it is alive prefigures the way it will be made up in the funeral home, where it will be given a smile that is really ‘into’ death. This ‘into’ is the key to everything. The point is not to be nor even to have a body, but to be into your own body. Into your sexuality, into your own desire. Into your own functions, as if they were energy differentials or video screens. The hedonism of the ‘into’: the body is a scenario and the curious hygienist threnody devoted to it runs through the innumerable fitness centres, body- building gyms, stimulation and simulation studios that stretch from Venice to Tupanga Canyon, bearing witness to a collective asexual obsession. This is echoed by the other obsession: that of being ‘into’, hooked in to your own brain. What people are contemplating on their word-processor screens is the operation of their own brains. It is not entrails that we try to interpret these days, nor even hearts or facial expressions; it is, quite simply, the brain. We want to expose to view its billions of connections and watch itoperating like a video-game. All this cerebral, electronic snobbery is hugely affected - far from being the sign of a superior knowledge of humanity, it is merely the mark of a simplified theory, since the human being is here reduced to the terminal excrescence of his or her spinal chord. But we should not worry too much about this: it is all much less scientific, less functional than is ordinarily thought. All that fascinates us is the spectacle of the brain and its workings. What we are wanting here is to see our thoughts unfolding before us - and this itself is a superstition. Hence, the academic grappling with his computer, ceaselessly correcting, reworking, and complexifying, turning the exercise into a kind of interminable psychoanalysis, memorizing everything in an effort to escape the final outcome, to delay the day of reckoning of death, and that other -fatal - moment of reckoning that is writing, by forming an endless feed-back loop with the machine. This is a marvellous instrument of exoteric magic. In fact all these interactions come down in the end to endless exchanges with a machine. Just look at the child sitting in front of his computer at school; do you think he has been made interactive, opened up to the world? Child and machine have merely been joined together in an integrated circuit. As for the intellectual, he has at last found the equivalent of what the teenager gets from his stereo and his walkman: a spectacular desublimation of thought, his concepts as images on a screen. In the Roxy, the sound-proofed bar dominates the dancefloor the way the screens dominate an air traffic control room or the technicians’ gallery towers over a television studio. The club is a fluorescent milieu with spotlighting, strobe effects, dancers swept by beams of light . . . all of these the effects you find on screens. And everyone is aware of this. Today, no staging of bodies, no performance can be without its control screen. This is not there to see or reflect those taking part, with the distance and magic of the mirror. No, it is there as an instantaneous, depthless refraction. Video, everywhere, serves only this end: it is a screen of ecstatic refraction. As such, it has nothing of the traditional image or scene, or of traditional theatricality, and its purpose is not to present action or allow self-contemplation; its goal is to be hooked up to itself. Without this circular hookup, without this brief, instantaneous network that a brain, an object, an event, or a discourse create by being hooked up to themselves, without this perpetual video, nothing has any meaning today. The mirror phase has given way to the video phase. This is not narcissism and it is wrong to abuse that term to describe the effect. What develops around the video or stereo culture is not a narcissistic imaginary, but an effect of frantic self-referentiality, a short-circuit which immediately hooks up like with like, and, in so doing, emphasizes their surface intensity and deeper meaninglessness. This is the special effect of our times. The ecstasy of the polaroid is of the same order: to hold the object and its image almost simultaneously as if the conception of light of ancient physics or metaphysics, in which each object was thought to secrete doubles or negatives of itself that we pick up with our eyes, has become a reality. It is a dream. It is the optical materialization of a magical process. The polaroid photo is a sort of ecstatic membrane that has come away from the real object. You stop a horse that is bolting. You do not stop a jogger who is jogging. Foaming at the mouth, his mind riveted on the inner countdown to the moment when he will achieve a higher plane of consciousness, he is not to be stopped. If you stopped him to ask the time, he would bite your head off. He doesn’t have a bit between his teeth, though he may perhaps be carryingdumb- bells or even weights in his belt (where are the days when girls used to wear bracelets on their ankles?). What the third-century Stylite sought in self-privation and proud stillness, he is seeking through the muscular exhaustion of his body. He is the brother in mortification of those who conscientiously exhaust themselves in the body-building studios on complicated machines with chrome pulleys and on terrifying medical contraptions. There is a direct line that runs from the medieval instruments of torture, via the industrial movements of production-line work, to the techniques of schooling the body by using mechanical apparatuses. Like dieting, bodybuilding, and so many other things, jogging is a new form of voluntary servitude (it is also a new form of adultery). Decidedly, joggers are the true Latter Day Saints and the protagonists of an easy-does-it Apocalypse. Nothing evokes the end of the world more than a man running straight ahead on a beach, swathed in the sounds of his Walkman, cocooned in the solitary sacrifice of his energy, indifferent even to catastrophes since he expects destruction to come only as the fruit of his own efforts, from exhausting the energy of a body that has in his own eyes become useless. Primitives, when in despair, would commit suicide by swimming out to sea until they could swim no longer. The jogger commits suicide by running up and down the beach. His eyes are wild, saliva drips from his mouth. Do not stop him. He will either hit you or simply carry on dancing around in front of you like a man possessed. The only comparable distress is that of a man eating alone in the heart of the city. You see people doing that in New York, the human flotsam of conviviality, no longer even concealing themselves to eat leftovers in public. But this still belongs to the world of urban, industrial poverty. The thousands of lone men, each running on their own account, with no thought for others, with a stereophonic fluid in their heads that oozes through into their eyes, that is the world of Blade Runner, the post-catastrophe world. Not to be aware of the natural light of California, nor even of a mountain fire that has been driven ten miles out to sea by the hot wind, and is enveloping the offshore oil platforms in its smoke, to see nothing of all this and obstinately to carry on running by a sort of lymphatic flagellation till sacrificial exhaustion is reached, that is truly a sign from the beyond. It is like the obese person who keeps on getting fatter, the record rotating endlessly in the same groove, the cells of a tumour proliferating, like everything that has lost the formula for stopping itself. This entire society, including its active, productive part - everyone - is running straight ahead, because they have lost the formula for stopping. All these track-suits and jogging suits, these loose-fitting shorts and baggy cotton shirts, these ‘easy clothes’ are actually old bits of nightwear, and all these relaxed walkers and runners have not yet left the night behind. As a result of wearing these billowing clothes, their bodies have come to float in their clothes and they themselves float in their own bodies. Anorexic culture: a culture of disgust, of expulsion, of anthropoemia, of rejection. Characteristic of a period of obesity, saturation, overabundance. The anorexic prefigures this culture in rather a poetic fashion by trying to keep it at bay. He refuses lack. He says: I lack nothing, therefore I shall not eat. With the overweight person, it is the opposite: he refuses fullness, repletion. He says: I lack everything, so I will eat anything at all. The anorexic staves off lack by emptiness, the overweight person staves off fullness by excess. Both are homeopathic final solutions, solutions by extermination. The jogger has yet another solution. In a sense, he spews himself out; he doesn’t merely expend his energy in his running, he vomits it. He has to attain the ecstasy of fatigue, the ‘high’ of mechanical annihilation, just as the anorexic aims for the ‘high’ of organic annihilation, the ecstasy of the emptybody and the obese individual seeks the high of dimensional annihilation: the ecstasy of the full body. The latest obsession of American public opinion: the sexual abuse of children. There is now a law that two people must be present when very young children are being handled for fear of unverifiable sexual abuse. At the same time, supermarket carrier bags are adorned with the portraits of missing children. Protect everything, detect everything, contain everything - obsessional society. Save time. Save energy. Save money. Save our souls - phobic society. Low tar. Low energy. Low calories. Low sex. Low speed - anorexic society. Curiously, in this world where everything is available in profusion, everything has to be saved and economized. The obsession of a young society, concerned to protect its future? The impression given is rather that of a sense of threat, all the more insidious for being groundless. It is profusion which creates an hallucination of a sort of backfiring into shortage and penury, which has to be averted by homeopathic discipline. There are no other reasons for these starvation rations - collective dieting, ecological control, this mortification of bodies and pleasures. A whole society organized to ward off the vengeance of overfed divinities, suffocated by plenty. Of course our basic problem today is how to avoid becoming overweight. Compiling inventories of everything, stocking everything, memorizing everything. Hence the elephants enveloped in liquid bitumen, whose bones become fossilized in its black, mineral viscosity, together with the lions, mammoths, and wolves who roamed the plains of Los Angeles and were the first, prehistoric victims of the oil fields. Today they have all received a second embalming at Hancock Park in a museum devoted to the rote-learning of prehistory. And, in conformity with the prevailing moral code, all this is presented with conviction. Americans are people of conviction, convinced of everything and seeking to convince. One of the aspects of their good faith is this stubborn determination to reconstitute everything of a past and a history which were not their own and which they have largely destroyed or spirited away. Renaissance castles, fossilized elephants, Indians on reservations, sequoias as holograms, etc. In storing details on their computers of all the known souls in the civilized (white) countries, the Mormons of Salt Lake City are behaving no differently from other Americans, who all share the same missionary spirit. It is never too late to revive your origins. It is their destiny: since they were not the first to be in on history, they will be the first to immortalize everything by reconstitution (by putting things in museums, they can match in an instant the fossilization process nature took millions of years to complete). But the conception Americans have of the museum is much wider than our own. To them, everything is worthy of protection, embalming, restoration. Everything can have a second birth, the eternal birth of the simulacrum. Not only are the Americans missionaries, they are also Anabaptists: having missed out on the original baptism, they dream of baptizing everything a second time and only accord value to this later sacrament which is, as we know, a repeat performance of the first, but its repetition as something more real. And this indeed is the perfect definition of the simulacrum. All Anabaptists are sectarian, and sometimes violent. Americans are no exception to this rule. To reconstruct things in their exact form, so as to present them on the Day of Judgement, they are prepared to destroy and exterminate - Thomas Münzer was an Anabaptist. It is not by chance that it is the Mormons who run the world’s biggest computerization project: the recording of twenty generations of living souls throughout the world, a process which is seen as a rebaptizing of those souls, bringing them a new promise of salvation. Evangelization has become a mission of mutants, of extraterrestrials, and if it has progressed (?) in that direction, it is thanks to the latest memory-storage techniques. And these have been made possible by the deep puritanism of computer science, an intensely Calvinistic, Presbyterian discipline, which has inherited the universal and scientific rigidity of the techniques for achieving salvation by good works. The Counter-Reformation methods of the Catholic Church, with its naive sacramental practices, its cults, its more archaic and popular beliefs, could never compete with this modernity. Executive Terminal Basic Extermination Metastatic Consumption Everywhere survival has become a burning issue, perhaps by some obscure weariness of life or a collective desire for catastrophe (though we should not take all this too seriously: it is also a playing at catastrophe). Certainly, this whole panoply of survival issues - dieting, ecology, saving the sequoias, seals or the human race - tends to prove that we are very much alive (just as all imaginary fairy-tales tend to prove that the real world is very real). But this is not so certain, for not only is the fact of living not really well-attested, but the paradox of this society is that you cannot even die in it any more since you are already dead. . . This is real suspense. And it is not simply an effect of living in the nuclear age, but derives from the ease with which we now live, which makes survivors of us all. If the bomb drops, we shall neither have the time to die nor any awareness of dying. But already in our hyper-protected society we no longer have any awareness of death, since we have subtly passed over into a state where life is excessively easy. The holocaust created an anticipatory form of such a condition. What the inmates of the concentration camps were deprived of was the very possibility of having control of their own deaths, of playing, even gambling with their own deaths, making their deaths a sacrifice: they were robbed of power over their own deaths. And this is what is happening to all of us, in slow, homeopathic doses, by virtue of the very development of our systems. The explosions and the extermination (Auschwitz and Hiroshima) still go on, though they have simply taken on a purulent, endemic form. The chain reaction continues nonetheless, the contagion, the unfolding of the viral and bacteriological process. The end of history was precisely the inauguration of this chain reaction. The obsessive desire for survival (and not for life) is a symptom of this state of affairs and doubtless also the most worrying sign of the degradation of the species. If you think about the forms that desire currently takes -antinuclear shelters, cryogenization, high-pressure therapy - you see that they are exactly the forms of extermination. To avoid dying, one chooses to withdraw into some protective bubble or other. In this light, we should take it as a reassuring sign that people lost interest in antinuclear protection so quickly (the shelter market has become a mere prestige market, like the market for artworks or luxury yachts). It seems that people have become tired of nuclear blackmail and decided not to give in to it, leaving the threat of destruction hanging in mid-air over them, perhaps with an obscure sense of how unreal it is. A fine example of a vital reaction disguised as resignation. ‘If we have to die, better to die in the open air than in an underground sarcophagus.’ At a stroke an end is put to survival blackmail and life can go on. Everyone is weary of these apocalyptic visions - the great scenario of the nuclear threat, the theatrical negotiations, ‘Star Wars’. In the end, theydefend themselves with a lack of imagination. Even attempts to stimulate that imagination in films like The Last Day have not worked. Nothing has ever been able to make this nuclear scene - or obscenity - credible. With delicate matters like this (as with cancer), imagining death has the effect of bringing the fatal event closer. The masses’ silent indifference to nuclear pathos (whether it comes from the nuclear powers or from antinuclear campaigners) is therefore a great sign of hope and a political fact of the utmost importance. There is a science-fiction story in which a number of very rich people wake up one morning in their luxury villas in the mountains to find that they are encircled by a transparent and insuperable obstacle, a wall of glass that has appeared in the night. From the depths of their vitrified luxury, they can still just discern the outside world, the real universe from which they are cut off, which has suddenly become the ideal world. But it is too late. These rich people will die slowly in their aquarium like goldfish. Some of the university campuses here remind me of this. Lost among the pine trees, the fields, and the rivers (it is an old ranch that was donated to the university), and made up of little blocks, each one out of sight of the others, like the people who live in them: this one is Santa Cruz. It’s a bit like the Bermuda Triangle (or Santa Barbara). Everything vanishes. Everything gets sucked in. Total decentring, total community. After the ideal city of the future, the ideal cosy nook. Nothing converges on a single point, neither the traffic, nor the architecture, nor authority. But, by that very token, it also becomes impossible to hold a demonstration: where could you assemble? Demonstrations can only go round and round in the forest, where the participants alone can see them. Of all the Californian campuses, famous for their spaciousness and charm, this is the most idealized, the most naturalized. It is the epitome of all that is beautiful. Famous architects designed the buildings and the bays of Carmel and Monterey stretch out all around. If the conviviality of the future already exists somewhere, then this must be the place. And yet this freedom, protected both by the pleasantness of the vegetation and by academic openness, becomes its own prisoner once again, immured in a natural and social overprotectedness which ends up producing all the agonies of the carceral universe (precisely by virtue of its walls, the carceral system may in certain conditions evolve in the direction of Utopia more rapidly than open social systems). Society has become emancipated here as nowhere else on earth. The psychiatric hospitals have been opened up, public transport is free, and yet paradoxically this ideal has become closed in on itself as if behind a wall of glass. A paradisiac and inward-looking illusion. We might understand what Lyotard calls the ‘Pacific Wall’ as the wall of crystal that imprisons California in its own beatitude. But whereas the demand for happiness used to be something oceanic and emancipatory, here it comes wrapped up in a foetal tranquillity. Are there still passions, murders, and acts of violence in this strange, padded, wooded, pacified, convivial republic? Yes, but the violence is autistic and reactional. There are no crimes of passion, but there are rapes, and a case where a dozen women were murdered in two years before the killer was discovered. This is foetal violence, as gratuitous as ‘automatic writing’. It seems an expression not so much of real aggression as of nostalgia for the old prohibitions (why does the number of rapes increase with the degree of sexual liberation?). How sentimental these mixed dormitories seem, opening out here on to the forest, as if nature itself could be convivial and maternal, could herself stand as guarantor for the blossoming of sexuality and the ecology of manners, as if nature could look sympathetically upon any human society, as if one could have some relationship with her, outside the cruel universe of magic, which was not stoical, not the Stoics’ relation between a blind, pitiless necessity and the even greater defiance, the even greater freedom one has to counterpose to it. Here, every last vestige of a heroic sense of destiny has disappeared. The whole place exudes an air of sentimental reconciliation with nature, with sex, with madness and even with history (by way of a carefully corrected, revised Marxism). Like many other aspects of contemporary America, Santa Cruz is part of the post-orgy world, the world left behind after the great social and sexual convulsions. The refugees from the orgy - the orgy of sex, political violence, the Vietnam War, the Woodstock Crusade, and the ethnic and anti-capitalist struggles too, together with the passion for money, the passion for success, hard technologies etc., in short, the whole orgy of modernity - are all there, jogging along in their tribalism, which is akin to the electronic tribalism of Silicon Valley. Reduced pace of work, decentralization, air-conditioning, soft technologies. Paradise. But a very slight modification, a change of just a few degrees, would suffice to make it seem like hell. A new development in the field of sexuality. The orgy is over, liberation is over; it is not sex one is looking for but one’s ‘gender’, i.e. both one’s ‘look’ and its genetic formula. People no longer oscillate between desire and its fulfilment, but between their genetic formula and their sexual identity (to be discovered). This is a new erotic culture. After a culture based on prohibition (‘What are your prerequisites for sex?’ — The door has to be locked, the lights have to be out, and my mother has to be in another State’), this is a culture based on the questioning of one’s own definition: ‘Am I sexed? What sex am I? Ultimately, is sex necessary? What does sexual difference consist in?’ Liberation has left everyone in an undefined state (it is always the same: once you are liberated, you are forced to ask who you are). After a triumphalist phase, the assertion of female sexuality has become as fragile as that of male sexuality. No one knows where they are. This is why there’s somuch love-making, so many children produced: there at least you still have proof that two people are needed so difference still exists. But not for long. Already, the ‘muscle-woman’, who, simply by using her vaginal muscles, manages to reproduce the effect of male penetration exactly, is a good example of self-referentiality and of getting along without difference - she at least has found her label. The more general problem is one of an absence of difference, bound up with a decline in the display of sexual characteristics. The outer signs of masculinity are tending towards zero, but so are the signs of femininity. It is in this conjuncture that we have seen new idols emerging, idols who take up the challenge of undefinedness and who play at mixing genres/genders. ‘Gender benders’. Neither masculine nor feminine, but not homosexual either. Boy George, Michael Jackson, David Bowie. . . Whereas the idols of the previous generation were explosive figures of sex and pleasure, these new idols pose for everyone the question of the play of difference and their own lack of definition. They are exceptional figures. For want of an identity, most of them have gone in search of a ‘gender model’, a generic formula. Some kind of differentiating feature has to be found, so why not look for it in fashion . . . or in genetics? A ‘look’ based on clothes, or a ‘look’ based on cells. Any old gimmick will do, any idiom. The question of difference is more crucial than that of pleasure. Are we seeing here a post-modern version of a sexual liberation that is now past and gone, that liberation as mere fashion, or is this a bio-sociological mutation in our own self- perception, based upon the sexual losing the priority it formerly enjoyed, a priority which characterized the whole modern period? ‘Gender Research: a New Frontier?’ Pushed to its logical conclusions, this would leave neither masculine nor feminine, but a dissemination of individual sexes referring only to themselves, each one managed as an independent enterprise. The end of seduction, the end of difference, and a slide towards a different system ofvalues. An astonishing paradox emerges: sexuality might become once again a merely secondary problem, as it was in most earlier societies, and be eclipsed by other stronger symbolic systems (birth, hierarchy, asceticism, glory, death). This would prove that sexuality was after all only one possible model among many, and not the most crucial. But what might those new models be today (for in the meantime all the others have disappeared)? The model that seems likely to emerge is that of an ideal of performance, of the genetic fulfilment of one’s own formula. In business, in emotional life, in their projects and their pleasures, everyone will seek to develop their optimum programme. Everyone will have their code, their formula. But also their ‘look’, their image. So shall we perhaps get something like a genetic ‘look’? Irvine: a new Silicon Valley. Electronic factories with no openings to the outside world, like integrated circuits. A desert zone, given over to ions and electrons, a supra-human place, the product of inhuman decision-making. By a terrible twist of irony it just had to be here, in the hills of Irvine, that they shot Planet of the Apes. But, on the lawn, the American squirrels tell us all is well, and that America is kind to animals, to itself, and to the rest of the world, and that in everyone’s heart there is a slumbering squirrel. The whole Walt Disney philosophy eats out of your hand with these pretty little sentimental creatures in grey fur coats. For my own part, I believe that behind these smiling eyes there lurks a cold, ferocious beast fearfully stalking us. . . On the same lawn with the squirrels stands a sign put there by some society or other of Jesus: ‘Vietnam, Cambodia, Lebanon, Grenada - We are a violent society in a violent world!’ There is nothing funny about Halloween. This sarcastic festival reflects, rather, an infernal demand for revenge by children on the adult world. Thethreat from this evil force hangs over adults here, equal in intensity only to their devotion to children. There is nothing more unhealthy than this childish sorcery, behind all the dressing up and the presents - people turn out their lights and hide, for fear of harassment. And it is no accident that some of them stick needles or razor blades into the apples or cookies they hand out to the children. Laughter on American television has taken the place of the chorus in Greek tragedy. It is unrelenting; the news, the stock-exchange reports, and the weather forecast are about the only things spared. But so obsessive is it that you go on hearing it behind the voice of Reagan or the Marines disaster in Beirut. Even behind the adverts. It is the monster from Alien prowling around in all the corridors of the spaceship. It is the sarcastic exhilaration of a puritan culture. In other countries, the business of laughing is left to the viewers. Here, their laughter is put on the screen, integrated into the show. It is the screen that is laughing and having a good time. You are simply left alone with your consternation. Vietnam on television (a pleonasm, since it always was a television war). The Americans fight with two essential weapons: air power and information. That is, with the physical bombardment of the enemy and the electronic bombardment of the rest of the world. These are non-territorial weapons, whilst all the Vietnamese weapons and all their tactics were products of the people and its territory. That is why the war was won by both sides: by the Vietnamese on the ground, by the Americans in the electronic mental space. And if the one side won an ideological and political victory, the other made Apocalypse Now and that has gone right around the world. The obsessive fear of the Americans is that the lights might go out. Lights are left on all night in the houses. In the tower blocks the empty offices remain lit. On the freeways, in broad daylight, the cars keep all their headlights on. In Palms Ave., Venice, California, a little grocery store that sells beer in a part of town where no one is on the streets after 7 p.m. leaves its orange and green neon sign flashing all night, into the void. And this is not to mention the television, with its twenty-four- hour schedules, often to be seen functioning like an hallucination in the empty rooms of houses or vacant hotel rooms - as in the Porterville hotel where the curtains were torn, the water cut off, and the doors swinging in the wind, but on the fluorescent screen in each of the rooms a TV commentator was describing the take-off of the space shuttle. There is nothing more mysterious than a TV set left on in an empty room. It is even stranger than a man talking to himself or a woman standing dreaming at her stove. It is as if another planet is communicating with you. Suddenly the TV reveals itself for what it really is: a video of another world, ultimately addressed to no one at all, delivering its images indifferently, indifferent to its own messages (you can easily imagine it still functioning after humanity has disappeared). In short, in America the arrival of night-time or periods of rest cannot be accepted, nor can the Americans bear to see the technological process halted. Everything has to be working all the time, there has to be no let-up in man’s artificial power, and the intermittent character of natural cycles (the seasons, day and night, heat and cold) has to be replaced by a functional continuum that is sometimes absurd (deep down, there is the same refusal of the intermittent nature of true and false: everything is true; and of good and evil: everything is good). You may seek to explain this in terms of fear, perhaps obsessional fear, or say that this unproductive expenditure is an act of mourning. But what is absurd is also admirable. The skylines lit up at dead of night, the air-conditioning systems cooling empty hotels in the desert and artificial light in the middle of the day all have something both demented and admirable about them. The mindlessluxury of a rich civilization, and yet of a civilization perhaps as scared to see the lights go out as was the hunter in his primitive night. There is some truth in all of this. But what is striking is the fascination with artifice, with energy and space. And not only natural space: space is spacious in their heads as well. All great world powers have at some time or another created their monumental avenues which provided, as one looked down them, a miniature representation of the infinitude of empire. But the Aztecs at Teotihuacan, the Egyptians in the Valley of Kings, and Louis XIV at Versailles all created these syntheses in an architecture that was their own. Here in Washington, the vast panorama that stretches from the Lincoln Memorial to the Capitol is made up of a series of museums encapsulating our entire universe from Stone Age to Space Age. This gives the whole thing a science-fiction feel, as if an attempt had been made to gather all the marks of earthly endeavour and culture together here for the benefit of a visitor from outer space. And the White House, standing just alongside, watching discreetly over the whole, itself comes to look like a museum, the museum of world power, with an air of remoteness and prophylactic whiteness. There is nothing to match flying over Los Angeles by night. A sort of luminous, geometric, incandescent immensity, stretching as far as the eye can see, bursting out from the cracks in the clouds. Only Hieronymus Bosch’s hell can match this inferno effect. The muted fluorescence of all the diagonals: Willshire, Lincoln, Sunset, Santa Monica. Already, flying over San Fernando Valley, you come upon the horizontal infinite in every direction. But, once you are beyond the mountain, a city ten times larger hits you. You will never have encountered anything that stretches as far as this before. Even the sea cannot match it, since it is not divided up geometrically. The irregular, scattered flickering of European cities does not produce the same parallel lines, the same vanishing points, the same aerial perspectives either. They are medieval cities. This one condenses by night the entire future geometry of the networks of human relations, gleaming in their abstraction, luminous in their extension, astral in their reproduction to infinity. Mulholland Drive by night is an extraterrestrial’s vantage-point on earth, or conversely, an earth-dweller’s vantage-point on the Galactic metropolis. Dawn in Los Angeles, coming up over the Hollywood hills. You get the distinct feeling that the sun only touched Europe lightly on its way to rising properly here, above this plane geometry where its light is still that brand new light of the edge of the desert. Long-stemmed palm trees, swaying in front of the electronic billboard, the only vertical signs in this two-dimensional world. At 6 a.m. a man is already telephoning from a public phonebox in Beverly Terrace. The neon signs of the night are going out as the daytime ones become visible. The light everywhere reveals and illuminates the absence of architecture. This is what gives the city its beauty, this city that is so intimate and warm, whatever anyone says of it: the fact is it is in love with its limitless horizontality, as New York may be with its verticality. LOS ANGELES FREEWAYS Gigantic, spontaneous spectacle of automotive traffic. A total collective act, staged by the entire population, twenty-four hours a day. By virtue of the sheer size of the layout and the kind of complicity that binds this network ofthoroughfares together, traffic rises here to the level of a dramatic attraction, acquires the status of symbolic organization. The machines themselves, with their fluidity and their automatic transmission, have created a milieu in their own image, a milieu into which you insert yourself gently, which you switch over to as you might switch over to a TV channel. Unlike our European motorways, which are unique, directional axes, and are therefore still places of expulsion (Virilio), the freeway system is a place of integration (they even say that there are families who drive round on these roads in their mobile homes without ever leaving). It creates a different state of mind, and the European driver very quickly gives up his aggressive, every-man-for-himself behaviour and his individual reactions, and adopts the rules of this collective game. There is something of the freedom of movement that you have in the desert here, and indeed Los Angeles, with its extensive structure, is merely an inhabited fragment of the desert. Thus the freeways do not de-nature the city or the landscape; they simply pass through it and unravel it without altering the desert character of this particular metropolis. And they are ideally suited to the only truly profound pleasure, that of keeping on the move. To the person who knows the American freeways, their signs read like a litany. ‘Right lane must exit.’ This ‘must exit’ has always struck me as a sign of destiny. I have got to go, to expel myself from this paradise, leave this providential highway which leads nowhere, but keeps me in touch with everyone. This is the only real society or warmth here, this collective propulsion, this compulsion - a compulsion of lemmings plunging suicidally together. Why should I tear myself away to revert to an individual trajectory, a vain sense of responsibility? ‘Must exit’: you are being sentenced. You are a player being exiled from the only - useless and glorious - form of collective existence. Through traffic merge left’: they tell you everything, everything is announced. Merely reading the signs that are essential to your survival gives you an extraordinary feeling of instant lucidity, of reflex ‘participation’, immediate and smooth. Of a functional participation that is reflected in certain precise gestures. The lines of traffic diverging towards Ventura Freeway and San Diego Freeway do not leave one another, they just separate out. At every hour of the day approximately the same number split off towards Hollywood or towards Santa Monica. Pure, statistical energy, a ritual being acted out - the regularity of the flows cancels out individual destinations. What you have here is the charm of ceremonies: you have the whole of space before you, just as ceremonies have the whole of time before them. The point is not to write the sociology or psychology of the car, the point is to drive. That way you learn more about this society than all academia could ever tell you. The way American cars have of leaping into action, of taking off so smoothly, by virtue of their automatic transmission and power steering. Pulling away effortlessly, noiselessly eating up the road, gliding along without the slightest bump (the surfaces of the highways and freeways are remarkable, matched only by the fluidity of the cars’ performance), braking smoothly but instantly, riding along as if you were on a cushion of air, leaving behind the old obsession with what is coming up ahead, or what is overtaking you (there is an unspoken agreement on collective driving here; in Europe we have only the highway code). All this creates a new experience of space, and, at the same time, a new experience of the whole social system. All you need to know about American society can be gleaned from an anthropology of its driving behaviour. That behaviour tells you much more than you could ever learn from its political ideas. Drive ten thousand miles across America and you will know more about the country than all the institutes of sociology and political science put together. The city was here before the freeway system, no doubt, but it now looks as though the metropolis has actually been built around this arterial network: It is the same with American reality. It was there before the screen was invented, but everything about the way it is today suggests it was invented with the screen in mind, that it is the refraction of a giant screen. This is not like a Platonic shadowplay, but more as if everything were carried along by, and haloed in, the gleam of the screen. Along with flux and mobility, the screen and its refraction are fundamental determinants of everyday events. A fusion of the kinetic and the cinematic produces a different mental configuration and overall perception from our own. You do not find mobility or the screen taking precedence over reality in the same way in Europe, where things most often remain within the static form of territory, the palpable form of substances. In fact, the cinema here is not where you think it is. It is certainly not to be found in the studios the tourist crowds flock to - Universal, Paramount, etc., those subdivisions of Disneyland. If you believe that the whole of the Western world is hypostatized in America, the whole of America in California, and California in MGM and Disneyland, then this is the microcosm of the West. In fact what you are presented with in the studios is the degeneration of the cinematographic illusion, its mockery, just as what is offered in Disneyland is a parody of the world of the imagination. The sumptuous age of stars and images is reduced to a few artificial tornado effects, pathetic fake buildings, and childish tricks which the crowd pretends to be taken in by to avoidfeeling too disappointed. Ghost towns, ghost people. The whole place has the same air of obsolescence about it as Sunset or Hollywood Boulevard. You come out feeling as though you have been put through some infantile simulation test. Where is the cinema? It is all around you outside, all over the city, that marvellous, continuous performance of films and scenarios. Everywhere but here. It is not the least of America’s charms that even outside the movie theatres the whole country is cinematic. The desert you pass through is like the set of a Western, the city a screen of signs and formulas. It is the same feeling you get when you step out of an Italian or a Dutch gallery into a city that seems the very reflection of the paintings you have just seen, as if the city had come out of the paintings and not the other way about. The American city seems to have stepped right out of the movies. To grasp its secret, you should not, then, begin with the city and move inwards to the screen; you should begin with the screen and move outwards to the city. It is there that cinema does not assume an exceptional form, but simply invests the streets and the entire town with a mythical atmosphere. That is where it is truly gripping. This is why the cult of stars is not a secondary phenomenon, but the supreme form of cinema, its mythical transfiguration, the last great myth of our modernity. Precisely because the idol is merely a pure, contagious image, a violently realized ideal. They say that stars give you something to dream about, but there is a difference between dreaming and fascination by images. The screen idols are immanent in the unfolding of life as a series of images. They are a system of luxury prefabrication, brilliant syntheses of the stereotypes of life and love. They embody one single passion only: the passion for images, and the immanence of desire in the image. They are not something to dream about; they are the dream. And they have all the characteristics of dreams: they produce a marked condensation (crystallization) effect and an effect of contiguity (they are immediately contagious), and, above all, they have that power of instantaneous visual materialization (Anschaulichkeit) of desire, which is also a feature of dreams. They do not, therefore, feed the romantic or sexual imagination; they are immediate visibility, immediate transcription, material collage, precipitation of desire. Fetishes, fetish objects, that have nothing to do with the world of the imagination, but everything to do with the material fiction of the image. In 1989 the Revolutionary Olympic Games will be held in Los Angeles to mark the bicentenary of the French Revolution. The flame of history passes to the West Coast. This is normal. Everything that disappears in Europe is born again in San Francisco. We may envisage a reconstruction of the great revolutionary scenes in giant holograms, the most extensive archives, a complete film library, the best actors, the best historians. A century from now you will not be able to tell the difference. It will be as if the Revolution had taken place here. If the Getty villa at Malibu were suddenly engulfed by lava, what difference would there be, a few centuries from now, between that building and the ruins of Pompeii? What would the promoters of the bicentenary do if a new revolution broke out between now and 1989? But there is no way that can happen. And yet you cannot help but wish that the actual event might really occur and short-circuit the simulacrum, or that the simulacrum might itself end in catastrophe. In the same way, at Universal Studios, you hope constantly that the special effects will turn into some real drama. But this is a final nostalgia which has actually been exploited by the cinema itself (Westworld, Future World). The Olympic Games - total happening, collective participation in national self-celebration. ‘We did it!’ We are the best. Reagan style. It would have taken another Leni Riefenstahl to film this new Berlin ‘36. Totally sponsored, totally euphoric, totally clean, a 100 per cent advertising event.No accidents, no catastrophes, no terrorism, no traffic-jams on the freeways, no panic and . . . no Soviets. In short, an image of an ideal world, for the whole world to see. But after the national orgasm a sort of collective melancholy comes over the Angelinos, showing how provincial this metropolis still is. If you get out of your car in this centrifugal metropolis, you immediately become a delinquent; as soon as you start walking, you are a threat to public order, like a dog wandering in the road. Only immigrants from the Third World are allowed to walk. It is, in a sense, their privilege, a privilege that goes along with that of occupying the empty hearts of the big cities. For other people, walking, fatigue, or muscular activity have become rare commodities, ‘services’ costing a lot of money. Thus, ironically, the old state of affairs has been inverted. Similarly, the queues at high-class restaurants or fashionable nightclubs are often longer than those at soup kitchens. This is democracy. The signs of the most utter poverty always have at least a chance of becoming fashionable. One of America’s specific problems is fame and glory, partly on account of its extreme rarity these days, but also because of its extreme vulgarization. ‘In the future, everyone will be famous for fifteen minutes’ (Andy Warhol). And it is true. Take, for example, the man who got on the wrong plane and found himself carted off to Auckland, New Zealand, instead of Oakland, near San Francisco. This event made him the hero of the day. He was interviewed everywhere and they are making a film about him. In this country, it is not the highest virtue, nor the heroic act, that achieves fame, but the uncommon nature of the least significant destiny. There is plenty for everyone, then, since the more conformist the system as a whole becomes,the more millions of individuals there are who are set apart by some tiny peculiarity. The slightest vibration in a statistical model, the tiniest whim of a computer are enough to bathe some piece of abnormal behaviour, however banal, in a fleeting glow of fame. Like this white Christ carrying a heavy cross down Main Street, Venice. It is a very hot day. You want to tell him it has already been done, two thousand years ago. But he is not trying to do anything new. He is just carrying his cross the same way as other people carry ‘Jesus Saves’ or ‘Know Jesus’ badges on their cars. You could point out that no one - not a single person - is watching, and that he is accorded only indifference and derision as he passes. But he would tell you that was exactly how it was two thousand years ago. The top of the Bonaventure Hotel. Its metal structure and its plate-glass windows rotate slowly around the cocktail bar. The movement of the skyscrapers outside is almost imperceptible. Then you realize that it is the platform of the bar that is moving, while the rest of the building remains still. In the end I get to see the whole city revolve around the top of the hotel. A dizzy feeling, which continues inside the hotel as a result of its labyrinthine convolution. Is this still architecture, this pure illusionism, this mere box of spatio-temporal tricks? Ludic and hallucinogenic, is this postmodern architecture? No interior/exterior interface. The glass facades merely reflect the environment, sending back its own image. This makes them much more formidable than any wall of stone. It’s just like people who wear dark glasses. Their eyes are hidden and others see only their own reflection. Everywhere the transparency of interfaces ends in internal refraction. Everything pretentiously termed ‘communication’ and ‘interaction’ - walk-man, dark glasses, automatic household appliances, hi-tech cars, even the perpetual dialogue with the computer - ends up with each monad retreating into the shade of its own formula, into its self-regulating little corner and its artificial immunity. Blocks like the Bonaventure building claim to be perfect, self-sufficient miniature cities. But they cut themselves off from the city more than they interact with it. They stop seeing it. They refract it like a dark surface. And you cannot get out of the building itself. You cannot fathom out its internal space, but it has no mystery; it is just like those games where you have to join all the dots together without any line crossing another. Here too everything connects, without any two pairs of eyes ever meeting. It is the same outside. A camouflaged individual, with a long beak, feathers, and a yellow cagoule, a madman in fancy dress, wanders along the sidewalks downtown, and nobody, but nobody, looks at him. They do not look at other people here. They are much too afraid they will throw themselves upon them with unbearable, sexual demands, requests for money or affection. Everything is charged with a somnambulic violence and you must avoid contact to escape its potential discharge. Now that the mad have been let out of the asylums everyone is seen as a potential madman. Everything is so informal, there is so little in the way of reserve or manners (except for that eternal film of a smile, which offers only a very flimsy protection), that you feel anything could blow up at any moment. By some chain reaction, all this latent hysteria could be released at a stroke. The same feeling in New York, where panic is almost the characteristic smell of the city streets. Sometimes it takes the form of a gigantic breakdown, as in 1976. All around, the tinted glass facades of the buildings are like faces: frosted surfaces. It is as though there were no one inside the buildings, as if there were no one behind the faces. And there really is no one. This is what the ideal city is like. First International Bank. Crocker Bank. Bank of America. Pentecostal Savings (or is that one a church?). All bunched together in the heart of the city, alongside the big airlines. Money is fluid. Like grace, it is never yours. Coming to claim it is an offence against the divinity. Have you deserved this favour? Who are you and what are you going to do with it? You are suspected of wanting to put it to some use, and an evil one no doubt, whereas money is so beautiful in the fluid and intemporal state it is in at the bank, when it is being invested rather than spent. Shame on you and kiss the hand that gives it to you. It is true that ownership of money burns your fingers, like power. We need people to take this risk for us and we should be eternally grateful to them. This is why I hesitate to deposit money in a bank. I am afraid I shall never dare to take it out again. When you go to confession and entrust your sins to the safe- keeping of the priest, do you ever come back for them? And yet the atmosphere in a bank is that of the confessional (there is no more kafkaesque situation): admit that you have money, confess that this is not normal. And it is true: having money is an awkward situation, from which the bank is only too happy to deliver you: ‘Your money interests us’ - the bank holds you to ransom, its greed knows no bounds. Its immodest gaze reveals your private parts to you, and you are forced to hand your money over to appease it. One day I tried to close my account, taking all the money out in cash. The teller would not let me go with such a sum on me: it was obscene, dangerous, immoral. Would I not at least take travellers’ cheques? ‘No, the whole lot in cash’. I was mad. In America, you are stark raving mad if, instead of believing in money and its marvellous fluidity, you want to carry it round on you in banknotes. Money is dirty; that you must admit. And we really do need all these concrete and metal sanctuaries to protect us from it. So banks fulfil a crucial social function, and it is quite logical that these buildings should form the monumental heart of every town and city.One of the finest things there is, at dawn: the Santa Monica pier, with the white waves rolling in, the sky grey over Venice, the pale green or turquoise hotel overlooking the sands, and the endless line of run-down motels with their grimy little lamps, their graffiti-covered walls. The first waves, already frequented by a few insomniac surfers, the oh-so-melancholy palm trees with their Roaring Twenties grace, and the merry-go-round. The bay that bends round towards Long Beach is as vast as the Bay of Ipanema in Rio, the only one of comparable size. But, unlike Rio with its proud, luxurious, and pretentious (though none the less beautiful) sea front, here the town ends almost in a piece of wasteground at the ocean, like a seaside suburb. And it has indeed the hazy charm of just such a suburb. Here at dawn, it is one of the most insignificant shorelines in the world, just a place to go fishing. The Western World ends on a shore devoid of all signification, like a journey that loses all meaning when it reaches its end. The immense metropolis of Los Angeles peters out here in the sea like a desert, with all the nonchalance of a desert. ‘LIVE OR DIE’: the graffiti message on the pier at Santa Monica is mysterious, because we really have no choice between life and death. If you live, you live, if you die, you die. It is like saying ‘be yourself, or don’t be!’ It is stupid, and yet it is enigmatic. You could read it to mean that you should live intensely or else disappear, but that is banal. Following the model of ‘pay or die!’, ‘your money or your life!’, it would become ‘your life or your life!’. Stupid again, since you cannot exchange life for itself. And yet there is poetic force in this implacable tautology, as there always is when there is nothing to be understood. In the end, the lesson of this graffiti is perhaps: ‘if you get more stupid than me, you die!’Where the others spend their time in libraries, I spend mine in the deserts and on the roads. Where they draw their material from the history of ideas, I draw mine from what is happening now, from the life of the streets, the beauty of nature. This country is naive, so you have to be naive. Everything here still bears the marks of a primitive society: technologies, the media, total simulation (bio-, socio-, stereo-, video-) are developing in a wild state, in their original state. Insignificance exists on a grand scale and the desert remains the primal scene, even in the big cities. Inordinate space, a simplicity of language and character. . . My hunting grounds are the deserts, the mountains, Los Angeles, the freeways, the Safeways, the ghost towns, or the downtowns, not lectures at the university. I know the deserts, their deserts, better than they do, since they turn their backs on their own space as the Greeks turned their backs on the sea, and I get to know more about the concrete, social life of America from the desert than I ever would from official or intellectual gatherings. American culture is heir to the deserts, but the deserts here are not part of a Nature defined by contrast with the town. Rather they denote the emptiness, the radical nudity that is the background to every human institution. At the same time, they designate human institutions as a metaphor of that emptiness and the work of man as the continuity of the desert, culture as a mirage and as the perpetuity of the simulacrum. The natural deserts tell me what I need to know about the deserts of the sign. They teach me to read surface and movement and geology and immobility at the same time. They create a vision expurgated of all the rest: cities, relationships, events, media. They induce in me an exalting vision of the desertification of signs and men. They form the mental frontier where the projects of civilization run into the ground. They are outside the sphere and circumference of desire. We should always appeal to the deserts against the excess of signification, of intention and pretention [sic!] in culture. They are our mythic operator. ROMERO SADDLE - CAMINO CIELO - BLUE CANYON - QUICK SILVER MINE - SYCAMORE CANYON - SAN RAPHAEL WILDERNESS As night is falling, after three hours driving, I am lost in the San Raphael Wilderness. Driving on and on towards the last of the sun’s rays, then by the headlights reflecting in the sand of the river bed. Will I get through or won’t I? Darkness is falling all around: the prospect of spending the night here looms, but the whisky creates a delicious sense of abandon. At last, after two hours driving and a descent into hell, I am resurrected in heaven, on the Camino Cielo ridge, with an aerial, night-time view of the lights of Santa Barbara. PORTERVILLE The journey here through forests of orange trees, their leaves a deep, geometric green, laid out neatly on wild hillsides that are carpeted with undulating grass like animal fur and resemble the hills of Tuscany. A driveway lined by fifty palm trees, all the same height and absolutely symmetrical, leads up to a planter’s house that is minuscule by comparison. All its shutters are closed. It could be a colonial scene, but in fact these are the western slopes of the Rockies, at the foot of Sequoia National Park. The road down into this town that is not really a town is as straight as the rows of orange trees and is peopled by Mexican slaves who have bought up their masters’ old 1950s Chevrolets. You go down through an oleander- linedavenue. But the real revelation is the town itself, which is completely devoid - to a point unintelligible to us Europeans - of any centre. You drive up and down every street in the town without being able to find anything remotely like a central point. Without even a bank, an administrative building, or a town hall, the town has no coordinates; it is like a plantation. The only sign of life: an American flag, just alongside the dead centre of the town, the hotel. This is the only three- storey building and its torn curtains flap through the broken window-panes in the warm late-afternoon wind. The hotel rooms can’t even be opened. The Mexican owner can’t find the keys. The prices are ridiculously low. You can spend a week here for twenty dollars. And yet in every room, with its sagging mattress and its dusty mirror, the TV is constantly on, apparently not for any resident, since it is on in the rooms that are open to the winds and those that can’t even be opened. You can see the televisions, or at least their reflections, from the street, through the curtains. All the corridors, with their worn-out carpets, display a single sign: EXIT. You can leave in any direction you like. You can rent three rooms here for a week for the price of a night in an ordinary motel. Forty years ago, no doubt, it was a hotel for Bakersfield’s smart set when they escaped to the cool of the mountains. Today it is the heart of Porterville, and an irrevocable process of decay has set in. But it is too hot to worry about that. Darkness falls slowly on Porterville, and Saturday night fever begins. ‘American Graffiti 85.’ All the cars drive up and down the main thorough-fare in slow or animated procession, a collective parade, drinking, eating ice-creams, calling out from one car to the next (whereas in the daytime they all drive round oblivious of anyone else). Music, PA systems, beer, ice-cream. It is the same ceremony, on a smaller scale, as the slow nocturnal cruising on the Strip in Las Vegas, or the procession of cars on the Los Angeles freeways simply transformed into a Saturday night provincial extravaganza. The only element of culture, the only mobile element: the car. No cultural centre, no centre of entertainment. A primitive society: the same motor identification, the same collective phantasy of an unfolding ritual - breakfast, movie, religious service, love and death - the whole of life as a drive-in. Truly magnificent. It is all in this parade of bulky capsules, luminous and silent (the whole thing passes off in relative silence with no gear changes and no overtaking; these are the same fluid monsters with their automatic transmissions, gliding along smoothly one behind the other). Nothing else will happen during the evening. Except that is for the madcap race between the 12-15-year-old girls - like cowgirls from a Western - which takes place in a corner of the town, under floodlights, in the dust kicked up by the horses, near the baseball park. And the next morning, Sunday morning, the deserted streets, streets hardly distinct from the desert, have a preternatural calm about them. The air is transparent, with the orange trees all around. After the night’s automobile ceremony the town is abandoned now to the light of its over- wide avenues, the lifeless stores, the half-awake service stations. Natural, orphaned light, without headlights or advertising signs. Just a few Mexicans cruise around in their long cars, while the first Whites wash theirs in front of their open verandas. The luminous insignificance of Sunday morning. A holographic micro-model of all America. Death Valley is as big and mysterious as ever. Fire, heat, light: all the elements of sacrifice are here. You always have to bring something into the desert to sacrifice, and offer it to the desert as a victim. A woman. If something has to disappear, something matching the desert for beauty, why not a woman? Nothing is more alien to American deserts than symbiosis (loose-fitting clothing, slow rhythms, oases) such as you find in native desert cultures. Here, everything human is artificial. Furnace Creek is a synthetic, air-conditioned oasis. But there is nothing more beautiful than artificial coolnessin the midst of heat, artificial speed in the middle of a natural expanse, electric light under a blazing sun, or the artificial practice of gambling in lost casinos. Reyner Banham is right: Death Valley and Las Vegas are inseparable; you have to accept everything at once, an unchanging timelessness and the wildest instantaneity. There is a mysterious affinity between the sterility of wide open spaces and that of gambling, between the sterility of speed and that of expenditure. That is the originality of the deserts of the American West; it lies in that violent, electric juxtaposition. And the same applies to the whole country: you must accept everything at once, because it is this telescoping that gives the American way of life its illuminating, exhilarating side, just as, in the desert, everything contributes to the magic of the desert. If you approach this society with the nuances of moral, aesthetic, or critical judgement, you will miss its originality, which comes precisely from its defying judgement and pulling off a prodigious confusion of effects. To side-step that confusion and excess is simply to evade the challenge it throws down to you. The violence of its contrasts, the absence of discrimination between positive and negative effects, the telescoping of races, technologies, and models, the waltz of simulacra and images here is such that, as with dream elements, you must accept the way they follow one another, even if it seems unintelligible; you must come to see this whirl of things and events as an irresistible, fundamental datum. The distinctions that are made elsewhere have little meaning here. It would be misguided to focus on aspects of an American civility that is often in fact far superior to our own (in our land of ‘high culture’) and then to point out that in other respects the Americans are barbarians. It would be wrong-headed to counterpose Death Valley, the sublime natural phenomenon, to Las Vegas, the abject cultural phenomenon. For the one is the hidden face of the other and they mirror each other across the desert, the one as acme of secrecy and silence, the other as acme of prostitution and theatricality. Having said that, there is something mysterious about Death Valley in itself. However beautiful the deserts of Utah and California may be, this one is something else again - something sublime. The preternatural heat haze that enshrouds it, its inverse depth - below sea level - this landscape with its underwater features, its salt surfaces and mudhills, the high mountain chains surrounding it, making it a kind of inner sanctuary - a gentle, spectral place of initiation (which comes from its geological depth and the atmosphere of spiritual limbo). What has always struck me about Death Valley is its mildness, its pastel shades and its fossil veil, the misty fantasmagoria of its mineral opera. There is nothing funereal or morbid about it: a transverberation in which everything is palpable, the mineral softness of the air, the mineral substance of the light, the corpuscular fluid of the colours, the total extra version of one’s body in the heat. A fragment of another planet (at least predating any form of human life), where another, deeper temporality reigns, on whose surface you float as you would on salt-laden waters. The senses, the mind, and even your sense of belonging to the human race are all numbed by the fact of having before you the pure, unadulterated sign of 180 million years, and therefore the implacable enigma of your own existence. It is the only place where it is possible to relive, alongside the physical spectrum of colours, the spectrum of the inhuman metamorphoses that preceded us, our successive historical forms: the mineral, the organic, salt desert, sand dunes, rock, ore, light, heat, everything the earth has been, all the inhuman forms it has been through, gathered together in a single anthologizing vision. The desert is a natural extension of the inner silence of the body. If humanity’s language, technology, and buildings are an extension of its constructive faculties, the desert alone is an extension of its capacity for absence, the ideal schema of humanity’s disappearance. When you come out of the Mojave, writes Banham, it is difficult to focus less than fifteen miles ahead of you. Your eye can no longer rest on objects that are near. It can nolonger properly settle on things, and all the human or natural constructions that intercept your gaze seem irksome obstacles which merely corrupt the perfect reach of your vision. When you emerge from the desert, your eyes go on trying to create emptiness all around; in every inhabited area, every landscape they see desert beneath, like a watermark. It takes a long time to get back to a normal vision of things and you never succeed completely. Take this substance from my sight! . . . But the desert is more than merely a space from which all substance has been removed. Just as silence is not what remains when all noise has been suppressed. There is no need to close your eyes to hear it. For it is also the silence of time. And even the foreshortening effect of cinema is present in Death Valley, for all this mysterious geology is also a scenario. The American desert is an extraordinary piece of drama, though in no sense is it theatrical like an Alpine landscape, nor sentimental like the forest or the countryside. Nor eroded and monotonous like the sub-lunar Australian desert. Nor mystical like the deserts of Islam. It is purely, geologically dramatic, bringing together the sharpest, most ductile shapes with the gentlest, most lascivious underwater forms - the whole metamorphism of the earth’s crust is present in synthesis, in a miraculous abridged version. All the intelligence of the earth and its elements gathered together here, in a matchless spectacle: a geological epic. Cinema is not alone in having given us a cinematic vision of the desert. Nature itself pulled off the finest of its special effects here, long before men came on the scene. It is useless to seek to strip the desert of its cinematic aspects in order to restore its original essence; those features are thoroughly superimposed upon it and will not go away. The cinema has absorbed everything -Indians, mesas, canyons, skies. And yet it is the most striking spectacle in the world. Should we prefer ‘authentic’ deserts and deep oases? For usmoderns, and ultramoderns, as for Baudelaire, who knew that the secret of true modernity was to be found in artifice, the only natural spectacle that is really gripping is the one which offers both the most moving profundity and at the same time the total simulacrum of that profundity. As here, where the depth of time is revealed through the (cinematic) depth of field. Monument Valley is the geology of the earth, the mausoleum of the Indians, and the camera of John Ford. It is erosion and it is extermination, but it is also the tracking shot, the movies. All three are mingled in the vision we have of it. And each phase subtly terminates the preceding one. The extermination of the Indians put an end to the natural cosmological rhythm of these landscapes, to which their magical existence was bound for millennia. With the arrival of pioneer civilization an extremely slow process gave way to a much quicker one. But this process itself was overtaken fifty years later by the tracking shots of the cinema which speeded up the process even more and, in a sense, put an end to the disappearance of the Indians by reviving them as extras. Thus this landscape has been witness to all the great events both of geology and anthropology, including some of the most recent. Hence the exceptional scenic qualities of the deserts of the West, combining as they do the most ancestral of hieroglyphs, the most vivid light, and the most total superficiality. Colours there seem rarefied, detached from all substance, diffracted into the air, floating on the surface of things. Hence the spectral, ghostly, and at the same time veiled, translucent, calm, and subtle impression made by these landscapes. And the mirage effect - a temporal mirage too - which comes near to total illusion. The rocks, sands, crystals, and cacti are eternal, but they are also ephemeral, unreal, and detached from their substance. The vegetation is minimal, but indestructible, and each new spring sees a miracle of bloom. By contrast, light itself has substance here. Floating like a powderon the air, it gives all shades of colour that pastel nuance that seems the very image of disincarnation, of the separation of the body from the spirit. In this sense, one may speak of the abstraction of the desert, of a deliverance from the organic, a deliverance that is beyond the body’s abject passage into carnal inexistence, into that dry, luminous phase of death in which the corruption of the body reaches completion. The desert is beyond this accursed phase of decomposition, this humid phase of the body, this organic phase of nature. The desert is a sublime form that banishes all sociality, all sentimentality, all sexuality. Words, even when they speak of the desert, are always unwelcome. Caresses have no meaning, except from a woman who is herself of the desert, who has that instantaneous, superficial animality in which the fleshly is combined with dryness and disincarnation. And yet, in another sense, there is nothing to match night falling in its shroud of silence on Death Valley, seen from broken-down, worn-out motel chairs on the verandah, looking out over the dunes. The heat does not fall off here. Only night falls, its darkness pierced by a few car headlights. And the silence is something extraordinary, as though it were itself all ears. It is not the silence of cold, nor of barrenness, nor of an absence of life. It is the silence of the whole of this heat over the mineral expanses that stretch out before us for hundreds of miles, the silence of the gentle wind upon the salt mud of Badwater, caressing the ore deposits of Telegraph Peak. A silence internal to the Valley itself, the silence of underwater erosion, below the very waterline of time, as it is below the level of the sea. No animal movement. Nothing dreams here, nothing talks in its sleep. Each night the earth plunges into perfectly calm darkness, into the blackness of its alkaline gestation, into the happy depression of its birth. Long before I left, I could not get Santa Barbara out of my mind. Santa Barbara is simply a dream and it has in it all the processes of dreams: the wearisome fulfilment of all desires, condensation, displacement, facility of action. All this very quickly becomes unreal. Happy days! This morning a bird came to my balcony to die. I photographed it. But no one is indifferent to his own life and the least event still has something moving about it. I was here in my imagination long before I actually came here. Suddenly this stay has become a sojourn in a previous existence. In the last weeks, time seemed multiplied by a feeling of no longer being there and of living Santa Barbara each day, with its fatal charm and its blandness, as the predestined site of an eternal return. Things fade into the distance faster and faster in the rear-view mirror of memory. Two and a half months disappear in a few moments, even quicker than the jet lag when your mind readjusts to Europe. It’s not easy keeping your sense of wonderment alive or the first flashes of surprise, or even recalling what it felt like when things were still unexpected. Things last no longer than the time it takes for them to happen. It used to be the agreeable custom that you went to see the same film more than once. We are losing that habit. I doubt now whether we really see our whole life flashing before us at the moment of our death. The very possibility of the Eternal Return is becoming precarious: that marvellous perspective presupposes that things unfold in a necessary, predestined order, the sense of which lies beyond them. There is nothing like that today; things merely follow on in a flabby order that leads nowhere. Today’s Eternal Return is that of the infinitely small, the fractal, the obsessive repetition of things on a microscopic and inhuman scale. It is not the exaltation of a will, nor the sovereign affirmation of an event, nor its consecration by an immutable sign, such as Nietzsche sought, but the viral recurrence of microprocesses. This is, admittedly,inescapable, but no powerful sign presents it to the imagination as predestined (neither nuclear explosions nor viral implosions can be named by the imagination). Such are the events which surround us: micro-processive and instantaneously obliterated. Coming back from California means re-entering a world you have known and lived in, but doing so without feeling the charm you might expect at returning to a former life. You had left that world behind in the hope it might be thoroughly transformed in your absence, but nothing of the sort has occurred. It got along quite nicely without you and it adjusts quite smoothly to your return. People and things conspire to make it seem as if you had not been away. For my own part, I left it all without regrets and I come back to it again without any great emotion. People are a thousand times more preoccupied with their own little lives than with the strangeness of another world. You are best advised, then, to land discreetly, to come back politely into this world keeping anything you may have to say - along with the few sights still gleaming in your memory - strictly to yourself. The confrontation between America and Europe reveals not so much a rapprochement as a distortion, an unbridgeable rift. There isn’t just a gap between us, but a whole chasm of modernity. You are born modern, you do not become so. And we have never become so. What strikes you immediately in Paris is that you are in the nineteenth century. Coming from Los Angeles, you land back in the 1800s. Every country bears a sort of historical predestination, which almost definitively determines its characteristics. For us, it is the bourgeois model of 1789 - and the interminable decadence of that model - that shapes our landscape. There is nothing we can do about it: everything here revolves around the nineteenth-century, bourgeois dream.  UTOPIA ACHIEVED For the European, even today, America represents something akin to exile, a phantasy of emigration and, therefore, a form of interiorization of his or her own culture. At the same time, it corresponds to a violent extra version and therefore to the zero degree of that same culture. No other country embodies to the same extent both this function of disincarnation and, at the same time, the functions of exacerbation and radicalization of the elements of our European cultures. . . It is by an act of force or coup de theatre - the geographical exile of the Founding Fathers of the seventeenth century adding itself to the voluntary exile of man within his own consciousness -that what in Europe had remained a critical and religious esotericism became transformed on the New Continent into a pragmatic exotericism. The whole foundation of America is a response to this dual operation of a deepening of the moral law in individual consciences, a radicalization of the Utopian demand which was always that of the sects, and the immediate materialization of that Utopia in work, custom, and way of life. To land in America is, even today, to land in that ‘religion’ of the way of life which Tocqueville described. This material Utopia of the way of life, where success and action are seen as profound illustrations of the moral law, was crystallized by exile and emigration and these have, in a sense, transformed it into a primal scene. For us, in Europe, it was the Revolution of 1789 that set its seal upon us, though it was a different seal, that of History, the State, and Ideology. Politics and history, not the Utopian, moral sphere, remain our primal scene. And if this ‘transcendent’ European-style revolution is far from confident today either of its means or its ends, the same cannot be said of the immanent revolution of the American way of life, of that moral and pragmatic assertiveness which constitutes now as ever the pathos of the New World. America is the original version of modernity. We are the dubbed or subtitled version. America ducks the question of origins; it cultivates no origin or mythical authenticity; it has no past and no founding truth. Having known no primitive accumulation of time, it lives in a perpetual present. Having seen no slow, centuries-long accumulation of a principle of truth, it lives in perpetual simulation, in a perpetual present of signs. It has no ancestral territory. The Indians’ territory is today marked off in reservations, the equivalent of the galleries in which America stocks its Rembrandts and Renoirs. But this is of no importance - America has no identity problem. In the future, power will belong to those peoples with no origins and no authenticity who know how to exploit that situation to the full. Look at Japan, which to a certain extent has pulled off this trick better than the US itself, managing, in what seems to us an unintelligible paradox, to transform the power of territoriality and feudalism into that of deterritoriality and weightlessness. Japan is already a satellite of the planet Earth. But America was already in its day a satellite of the planet Europe. Whether we like it or not, the future has shifted towards artificial satellites. The US is Utopia achieved. We should not judge their crisis as we would judge our own, the crisis of the old European countries. Ours is a crisis of historical ideals facing up to the impossibility of their realization. Theirs is the crisis of an achieved Utopia, confronted with the problem of its duration and permanence. The Americans are not wrong in their idyllic conviction that they are at the centre of the world, the supreme power, the absolute model for everyone. And this conviction is not so much founded on natural resources, technologies, and arms, as on the miraculous premiss of a Utopia made reality, of a society which, with a directness we might judge unbearable, is built on the idea that it is the realization of everything the others have dreamt of - justice, plenty, rule of law, wealth, freedom: it knows this, it believes in it, and in the end, the others have come to believe in it too. In the present crisis of values, everyone ends up turning towards the culture which dared to forge right ahead and, by a theatrical masterstroke, turn those values into reality, towards that society which, thanks to the geographical and mental break effected by emigration, allowed itself to imagine it could create an ideal world from nothing. We should also not forget the fantasy consecration of this process by the cinema. Whatever happens, and whatever one thinks of the arrogance of the dollar or the multinationals, it is this culture which, the world over, fascinates those very people who suffer most at its hands, and it does so through the deep, insane conviction that it has made all their dreams come true. But this is really not so very crazy: all pioneer societies have been more or less ideal societies. Even the Jesuits of Paraguay. Even the Portuguese in Brazil founded what was in a sense an ideal patriarchal, slave-owning society, though unlike the American, Anglo-Saxon, Puritan model, the southern model had little chance of being universally adopted in the modern world. By exporting itself, by becoming hypostatized across the sea, the ideal purged itself of its history, took on concrete reality, developed withnew blood and experimental energy. The dynamism of the ‘new worlds’ still bears witness to their superiority over the ‘old countries’: the ideal the others only cultivated as an ultimate, and secretly impossible, goal, they put into operation. Colonization was, in this sense, a world-scale coup de theatre which leaves deep, nostalgic traces everywhere, even when it is collapsing. For the Old World, it represents the unique experience of an idealized substitution of values, almost as you find in science-fiction novels (the tone of which it often reflects, as in the US), a substitution which at a stroke short-circuited the destiny of these values in their countries of origin. The emergence of these societies at the margins deprives the historical societies of their destinies. The brutal extrapolation of their essence across the seas means that they lose control of their development. They are eradicated by the ideal model they have themselves secreted. And development will never again take place in the form of progressive alignment. The moment at which those values, which up to then had been transcendent, are realized, are projected into reality, or collapse in the encounter with it (America), is an irreversible one. This is what separates us, come what may, from the Americans. We shall never catch them up, and we shall never have their candour. We merely imitate them, parody them with a fifty-year time lag, and we are not even successful at that. We do not have either the spirit or the audacity for what might be called the zero degree of culture, the power of unculture. It is no good our trying more or less to adapt, their vision of the world will always be beyond our grasp, just as the transcendental, historical Weltanschauung of Europe will always be beyond the Americans. Just as the countries of the Third World will never internalize the values of democracy and technological progress. There are some gaps that are definitive and cannot be bridged. We shall remain nostalgic Utopians, agonizing over our ideals, but baulking, ultimately, at their realization, professing that everything ispossible, but never that everything has been achieved. Yet that is what America asserts. Our problem is that our old goals - revolution, progress, freedom - will have evaporated before they were achieved, before they became reality. Hence our melancholy. We shall never have had the good fortune to enjoy the coup de theatre. We live in negativity and contradiction; they live in paradox (for a realized Utopia is a paradoxical idea). And the quality of the American way of life resides for many in that pragmatic, paradoxical humour of theirs, whilst ours is (was?) characterized by the subtlety of our critical wit. Many American intellectuals envy us this and would like to fashion a set of ideal values and a history for themselves, and relive the philosophical or Marxist delights of old Europe. Yet this runs against the grain of everything that makes up their original situation, since the charm and power of American (un)culture derive precisely from the sudden and unprecedented materialization of models. When I see Americans, particularly American intellectuals, casting a nostalgic eye towards Europe, its history, its metaphysics, its cuisine, and its past, I tell myself that this is just a case of unhappy transference. History and Marxism are like fine wines and haute cuisine: they do not really cross the ocean, in spite of the many impressive attempts that have been made to adapt them to new surroundings. This is a just revenge for the fact that we Europeans have never really been able to domesticate modernity, which also refuses to cross the ocean, though in the other direction. There are products which cannot be imported or exported. That is our loss - and theirs. If, for us, society is a carnivorous flower, history for them is an exotic one. Its fragrance is no more convincing than the bouquet of Californian wines (in spite of all the effort being expended to make us believe otherwise). Not only can history not be caught up, but it seems that in this ‘capitalist’society capital can never actually be grasped in its present reality. It is not that our Marxist critics have not tried to run after it, but it always stays a length ahead of them. By the time one phase has been unmasked, capital has already passed on to another (Ernest Mandel and his third phase of world capital). Capital cheats. It doesn’t play by the rules of critique, the true game of history. It eludes the dialectic, which only reconstitutes it after the event, a revolution behind. Even anti-capitalist revolutions only serve to give fresh impetus to its own: they are the equivalent of the ‘exogenous events’ Mandel speaks of, like wars, crises, or the discovery of goldmines, which set capital off on a new developmental process on fresh bases. In the end, these theorists themselves reveal the inanity of their hopes. By reinventing capital in each successive phase on the basis of the primacy of political economy, they simply confirm the absolute initiative capital enjoys as historical event. They therefore fall straight into their own trap and give themselves no chance of getting ahead of it. And this at the same time ensures - as was perhaps their objective - the continuing validity of their retrospective analyses. America has never been short of violence, nor of events, people, or ideas, but these things do not of themselves constitute a history. Octavio Paz is right when he argues that America was created in the hope of escaping from history, of building a Utopia sheltered from history, and that it has in part succeeded in that project, a project it is still pursuing today. The concept of history as the transcending of a social and political rationality, as a dialectical, conflictual vision of societies, is not theirs, just as modernity, conceived precisely as an original break with a certain history, will never be ours. We have lived long enough now in the unhappy consciousness of this modernity to be aware of that. Europe invented a certain kind of feudalism, aristocracy, bourgeoisie, ideology, and revolution: all this had meaning for us, but at bottom it had no meaning elsewhere. All who have tried to ape these things have either made themselves a laughing stock or have been dramatically driven off course (we ourselves are doing little more than merely imitating ourselves, outliving ourselves). America made a break with all that and found itself in a situation of radical modernity: it is, therefore, in America and nowhere else that modernity is original. We can only imitate it without being able to challenge it on its own home territory. Once an event has taken place, it has taken place, full stop. And when I see Europe casting longing eyes towards all- out modernity, I tell myself that that, too, is an unhappy transference. We are still at the centre, but at the centre of the Old World. They who were a marginal transcendence of that Old World are today its new, eccentric centre. Eccentricity is stamped on their birth certificate. We shall never be able to take it from them. We shall never be able to excentre or decentre ourselves in the same way. We shall therefore never be modern in the proper sense of the term. And we shall never enjoy the same freedom -not the formal freedom we take for granted, but the concrete, flexible functional, active freedom we see at work in American institutions and in the head of each citizen. Our conception of freedom will never be able to rival their spatial, mobile conception, which derives from the fact that at a certain point they freed themselves from that historical centrality. ; From the day when that eccentric modernity was born in all its glory on the other side of the Atlantic, Europe began to disappear. The myths migrated. Today, all the myths of modernity are American. It will do us no good to worry our poor heads over this. In Los Angeles, Europe has disappeared. As Isabelle Huppert says: They have everything. They don’t need anything. Admittedly, they envy us our past and our culture and admire them, but deep down to them we are a sort of elegant Third World.’In the political sphere, there will always remain of this initial decentring a federalism, an absence of centralism and, at the level of mores and culture, a decentralization, an eccentricity which is that of the New World in relation to Europe. The US has no insoluble problem of federation (they have, of course, had their War of Secession, but we are speaking here of the current federal set-up), because they are from the outset, from the very dawn of their history, a culture of mixing, of national and racial mix, of rivalry and heterogeneity. This is clearly visible in New York where each successive skyscraper and, after its own fashion, each ethnic group has dominated the city, and where the whole none the less still gives the impression not of a heteroclite mish-mash, but of converging energies, not of unity or plurality, but of intensity born of rivalry, of antagonistic power, thus creating a complicity, a collective attraction, beyond culture or politics, in the very violence or banality of the way of life. If we stay with this line of thinking, we can see that there is a profound difference in racial, ethnic tone between America and France. In America the violent mixing of multiple European nationalities, then of exogenous races, produced an original situation. This multiracialism transformed the country and gave it its characteristic complexity. In France there was neither an initial mix, nor a real resolution, nor was there any real challenge between ethnic groups. All that happened was a transferring of the colonial situation back to the metropolis, out of its original context. All our immigrants are, at bottom, harkis,* living under the social protection of their oppressors, to whom they can oppose only their poverty and their de facto sentence of transportation for life. Immigration is, admittedly, a hot issue, but the presence of several million immigrants has not made its mark on the French way of life nor changed the face of the country. That is why, when you * Harkis are Algerian Muslims who took French citizenship after Algerian Independence. [Tr.] return to France, the dominant impression is a clammy sense of petty racism, of everyone being in an awkward, shameful position. The sequel to a colonial situation, in which the bad faith of both colonizer and colonized persists, whereas in America, each ethnic group, each race develops a language, a culture in competition with and sometimes superior to that of the ‘natives’, and each group symbolically rises to the top. This is not a question of formal equality or freedom, but of a de facto freedom expressed in rivalry and competition and this gives a singular vivacity and an air of openness to the confrontation between the races. Our European culture is one that has staked its all on the universal and the danger menacing it is that of perishing by the universal. . . This includes not only the extension of the concepts of market, monetary exchange, or production goods, but also the imperialism of the idea of culture. We should be wary of this idea, which has, like the concept of revolution, only become universal by being abstractly formalized, and which devours singularity just as rapidly as revolution devours its children. One consequence of this claim to universality is that it makes both downward diversification and upward federation equally impossible. Once a nation and a culture have been centralized by a solid historical process, they experience insurmountable difficulties when they attempt either to create viable sub-units or to integrate themselves into some coherent larger entity. . . There is a sort of inevitability about the centralizing process. Hence the difficulties currently being encountered in the attempt to find a European spirit and culture, a European dynamism. Inability to produce a federal event (Europe), a local event (decentralization), a racial event (multiracialism). Too entangled by our history, we can only produce an apologetic centralism (a Clochemerle pluralism) and an apologetic mixing (our soft racism). The principle of achieved Utopia explains the absence and, moreover, the lack of need for metaphysics and the imaginary in American life. It gives Americans a perception of reality different from our own. The real is not connected with the impossible and no failure can throw it into question. What is thought in Europe becomes reality in America - everything that disappears in Europe reappears in San Francisco! And yet the idea of an achieved Utopia is a paradoxical one. If it is negativity, irony, and the sublime that govern European thinking, it is paradox which dominates that of America, the paradoxical humour of an achieved materiality, of an ever renewed self-evidence, of a bright new faith in the legality of the fait accompli which we always find amazing, the humour of a naive visibility of things, whilst we operate in the uncanny realm of the déjà vu and the glaucous transcendence of history. We criticize Americans for not being able either to analyse or conceptualize. But this is a wrong-headed critique. It is we who imagine that everything culminates in transcendence, and that nothing exists which has not been conceptualized. Not only do they care little for such a view, but their perspective is the very opposite: it is not conceptualizing reality, but realizing concepts and materializing ideas, that interests them. The ideas of the religion and enlightened morality of the eighteenth century certainly, but also dreams, scientific values, and sexual perversions. Materializing freedom, but also the unconscious. Our phantasies around space and fiction, but also our phantasies of sincerity and virtue, or our mad dreams of technicity. Everything that has been dreamt on this side of the Atlantic has a chance of being realized on the other. They build the real out of ideas. We transform the real into ideas, or into ideology. Here in America only what is produced or manifested has meaning; for us in Europe only what can be thought or concealed has meaning. Even materialism is only an idea in Europe. It is in America that it becomes concretely realized in the technical operation of things, in the transformation of a way of thinking into a way oflife, in the ‘action’ of life (‘action’ in the film-making sense, as what happens when the cameras begin to roll). For the materiality of things is, of course, their cinematography. Americans believe in facts, but not in facticity. They do not know that facts are factitious, as their name suggests. It is in this belief in facts, in the total credibility of what is done or seen, in this pragmatic evidence of things and an accompanying contempt for what may be called appearances or the play of apperances [sic!] - a face does not deceive, behaviour does not deceive, a scientific process does not deceive, nothing deceives, nothing is ambivalent (and at bottom this is true: nothing deceives, there are no lies, there is only simulation, which is precisely the facticity of facts) - that the Americans are a true Utopian society, in their religion of the fait accompli, in the naivety of their deductions, in their ignorance of the evil genius of things. You have to be Utopian to think that in a human order, of whatever nature, things can be as plain and straightforward as that. All other societies contain within them some heresy or other, some dissidence, some kind of suspicion of reality, the superstitious belief in a force of evil and the possible control of that force by magic, a belief in the power of appearances. Here, there is no dissidence, no suspicion. The emperor has no clothes; the facts are there before us. As is well known, the Americans are fascinated by the yellow-skinned peoples in whom they sense a superior form of cunning, a higher form of that absence of truth which frightens them. Admittedly, the irony of community is missing here, as is the playfulness of social life. The charm to be found in social graces and in the theatre of social relations is all transferred outwards into the advertising of life and lifestyles. This is a society that is endlessly concerned to vindicate itself, perpetuallyseeking to justify its own existence. Everything has to be made public: what you are worth, what you earn, how you live - there is no place here for interplay of a subtler nature. The society’s ‘look’ is a self-publicizing one. The American flag itself bears witness to this by its omnipresence, in fields and built-up areas, at service stations, and on graves in the cemeteries, not as a heroic sign, but as the trademark of a good brand. It is simply the label of the finest successful international enterprise, the US. This explains why the hyperrealists were able to paint it naively, without either irony or protest (Jim Dine in the sixties), in much the same way as Pop Art gleefully transposed the amazing banality of consumer goods on to its canvases. There is nothing here of the fierce parodying of the American anthem by Jimi Hendrix, merely the light irony and neutral humour of things that have become banal, the humour of the mobile home and the giant hamburger on the sixteen-foot long billboard, the pop and hyper humour so characteristic of the atmosphere of America, where things almost seem endowed with a certain indulgence towards their own banality. But they are indulgent towards their own craziness too. Looked at more generally, they do not lay claim to being extraordinary; they simply are extraordinary. They have that extravagance which makes up odd, everyday America. This oddness is not surrealistic (surrealism is an extravagance that is still aesthetic in nature and as such very European in inspiration); here, the extravagance has passed into things. Madness, which with us is subjective, has here become objective, and irony which is subjective with us has also turned into something objective. The fantasmagoria and excess which we locate in the mind and the mental faculties have passed into things themselves. Whatever the boredom, the hellish tedium of the everyday in the US or anywhere else, American banality will always be a thousand times more interesting than the European - and especially the French - variety. Perhaps because banality here is born of extreme distances, of the monotony of wide-open spaces and the radical absence of culture. It is a native flower here, asis the opposite extreme, that of speed and verticality, of an excess that verges on abandon, and indifference to values bordering on immorality, whereas French banality is a hangover from bourgeois everyday life, born out of a dying aristocratic culture and transmuted into petty-bourgeois mannerism as the bourgeoisie shrank away throughout the nineteenth century. This is the crux: it is the corpse of the bourgeoisie that separates us. With us, it is that class that is the carrier of the chromosome of banality, whereas the Americans have succeeded in preserving some humour in the material signs of manifest reality and wealth. This also explains why Europeans experience anything relating to statistics as tragic. They immediately read in them their individual failure and take refuge in a pained denunciation of the merely quantitative. The Americans, by contrast, see statistics as an optimistic stimulus, as representing the dimensions of their good fortune, their joyous membership of the majority. Theirs is the only country where quantity can be extolled without compunction. This same indulgence and humour which things attest in their banality here, Americans also show towards themselves and other people. Their intellectual conduct is pleasant, a model of gentleness. They make no claim to what we call intelligence and they do not feel threatened by other people’s. For them, this is merely a particular cast of mind in which one should not indulge unduly. They do not therefore move spontaneously to deny or contest; their natural inclination is towards agreement. When we say ‘I agree with you’, we do so to contest what follows. When an American says he agrees, it is because, in all honesty, he can see no reason to demur. But quite often he will confirm your analysis by facts, statistics, or lived experience, thereby divesting it of all conceptual value. This self-indulgence, which is not without humour, is evidence of a society secure in its wealth and power, a society which seems, to some extent, to have internalized Hannah Arendt’s comment that the American revolution, unlike the European revolutions, was successful. But even a successful revolution has its victims and its sacrificial emblems. When all is said and done, it is on the murder of Kennedy that Reagan’s current reign is founded. That murder has been neither avenged nor elucidated, and with good reason. And this is not to mention the murder of the Indians. It is the energy of Kennedy’s murder which radiates out over present-day America. I say this to illustrate not only the indulgence, but the self-publicizing, self-justificatory violence of this society, that triumphalist violence which forms part of all successful revolutions. Tocqueville describes the beneficial effects of democracy and the American constitution with considerable enthusiasm, praising the inherent freedom of the way of life, the regularity of mores (rather than the equality of status), the supremacy of a moral (rather than political) organization of society. He then describes with equal lucidity the extermination of the Indians and the condition of the Negroes, without ever bringing these two realities together. As if good and evil had developed separately. Is it possible that one can, while keenly feeling both these aspects, pass over the relation between them? Certainly it is, and the same paradox faces us today: we shall never resolve the enigma of the relation between the negative foundations of greatness and that greatness itself. America is powerful and original; America is violent and abominable. We should not seek to deny either of these aspects, nor reconcile them. But what has become of this paradoxical grandeur, the New World’s original situation as described by Tocqueville? What has become of this American revolution that consisted in the dynamic resolution of a clearly understood individual interest and a well-tempered collective morality? A problem that was not resolved in Europe and for that reason was to fuel a problematic of history, of the State, and the disappearance of the State,which America has not known. What has become of the challenge sketched out in Tocqueville: can a nation strike a pact of greatness on the basis of each individual’s banal interest alone? Can there exist a pact of equality, and banality (of interests, rights, and wealth) which retains a heroic and original dimension? (for what is a society without a heroic dimension?). In short, has the New World fulfilled its promise? Has it reaped the benefits of freedom to the full, or has it merely garnered all the unhappy consequences of equality? The glory of American power is most often described as an effect of freedom and its exercise. But freedom does not of itself generate power. Freedom understood as public action, as the collective discourse of a society on its own undertakings and values, has in fact disappeared in the individual liberation of mores and in agitation (agitation, as is well known, is one of the Americans’ main activities). It is, therefore, equality and its consequences that have been more instrumental in the creation of power. This is the equality of which Tocqueville once said, in a fine phrase, T do not find fault with equality for drawing men into the pursuit of forbidden pleasures, but for absorbing them entirely in the search for the pleasures that are permitted.’ It is this equality, the modern equalization of statuses and values, the uniformity of features and characters, which gives birth to power. It is around this equality that Tocqueville’s paradox is recast: the American world tends both towards absolute insignificance (all things tending to become equal and therefore cancelling each other out in their power) and towards absolute originality - today even more than 150 years ago, the effects having been multiplied by geographical extension. This is a world that has shown genius in its irrepressible development of equality, banality, and indifference. It is this overall dynamism, this dynamic of the abolition of differences which is so exciting and which poses, in Tocqueville’s words, a new problem for the understanding of human societies. It is, moreover, extraordinary to see how little the Americans have changed in the last two centuries - much less than European societies. Whereas these were caught up in the revolutions of the nineteenth century, the Americans kept intact - preserved as it was by a breadth of ocean that created something akin to temporal insularity - the Utopian and moral perspective of the men of the eighteenth century, or even of the Puritan sects of the seventeenth, transplanted and kept alive, safely sheltered from the vicissitudes of history. This Puritan and moral hysteresis is that of exile, that of Utopia. We criticize them for this: why did the revolution not take place here, in this new country, this land of liberty and advanced bastion of capitalism? Why do the ‘social’ and the ‘political’, our favoured categories, have so little purchase here? The answer is that the social and philosophical nineteenth century did not cross the Atlantic and here the driving forces are Utopia and morality, the concrete idea of happiness and mores, all of which political ideology, with Marx at its head, liquidated in Europe in favour of an ‘objective’ conception of historical transformation. It is from this point of view that we tax Americans with historical naivety and moral hypocrisy. But the fact is simply that, in their collective consciousness, they are closer to the models of thought of the eighteenth century, which are Utopian and pragmatic, than to those that were to be imposed by the French revolution, which were ideological and revolutionary. Why are the sects so powerful and dynamic? The mixing of races, institutions, and technologies should have swept them away long ago. Yet the fact is that they have preserved here the living form and practical illuminism of their origins, together with their moral obsession. In a sense, it is their micro-model which has been extended to the whole of America. From the beginning, the sects played the major role in the move towards an achieved Utopia, which is the equivalent of an ‘acting out’. They it is who live on Utopia (the Church considers it a virtual heresy) and who strive to bring about the Kingdom of God on Earth, whereas the Church restricts itself to the hope of salvation and theological virtues. It is as though America as a whole had espoused this sect-like destiny: the immediate concretization of all perspectives of salvation. The multiplication of individual sects should not fool us: the important point is that the whole of America is preoccupied with the sect as a moral institution, with its immediate demand for beatification, its material efficacity, its compulsion for justification, and doubtless also with its madness and frenzy. If America were to lose this moral perspective on itself, it would collapse. This is not perhaps evident to Europeans, for whom America is a cynical power and its morality a hypocritical ideology. We remain unconvinced by the moral vision Americans have of themselves, but in this we are wrong. When they ask with such seriousness why other peoples detest them, we would be wrong to smile, for it is this same self-examination which makes possible both the various ‘Watergates’ and the unrelenting exposure of corruption and their own society’s faults in the cinema and the media, a freedom we might envy them, we who are the truly hypocritical societies, keeping our individual and public affairs concealed beneath the bourgeois affectations of secrecy and respectability. Tocqueville’s central idea is that the spirit of America is to be found in its mode of life, in the revolution of mores, the moral revolution. This creates neither a new legality nor a new State, but it does create a practical legitimacy, a legitimacy grounded in the way of life. Salvation no longer has to do with the divine or the State, but with the ideal form of practical organization. Is this to be traced back to the secularization of conscience effected by Protestantism, to the introjection of divine jurisdiction into daily discipline? The fact is that religion has become part of everyday life, which means that it can no longer be challenged or questioned as to its bases, since it no longer has transcendent value. This is religion as way of life. Similarly, politics has become part of everyday life - as pragmatic machine, as game, as interaction, as spectacle - which means that it can no longer be judged from a specifically political point of view. There is no ideological or philosophical principle of government any more. Things are at once both more naive and more conjunctural. This does not mean there are no strategies, but they are modal, not final strategies. Sexuality itself has become part of life, which means that it, too, no longer has transcendent value, neither as prohibition, nor as principle of analysis, pleasure, or transgression. It has been ‘ecologized’, psychologized, secularized for domestic use. It has become part of the way of life. The pre-eminent position accorded to mores, the hegemony enjoyed by the ‘way of life’ signifies that the abstract universal of law is subordinated to the concrete regulation of exchanges. Law is not consensual: you are supposed to know it and obey it. But there may be honour in disobeying it too, and history is made of the simultaneous extolling of the law and of those who have broken it. What strikes you, by contrast, in the American system, is that there is no honour in breaking laws, nor prestige in transgression or being exceptional. This is that notorious American conformism, which we see as a sign of social and political weakness. But the fact is that people are more united on concrete regulation than on abstract legislation here; they are more agreed on informal ways of doing things than on a formal authority. What could it mean to dissociate oneself from a rule, to challenge a mechanism? You have to understand this conventional, pragmatic solidarity of American customs, which is based not on a social contract but on a kind of moral pact, and which might be compared not so much to the highway code, which anyone may disobey, as to the consensus that governs driving on the freeways. This conformity makes American society close to primitive societies, in which it would be absurd to distinguish oneself morally by disobeying the collective ritual. American conformism is not therefore ‘naive’: it is the product of a pact at the level of custom, of a set of rules and procedures which presuppose quasi- spontaneous adherence. Whereas our lives, by contrast, are governed by an equally ritualized disobedience of our own value system. This ‘conformism’ reflects a particular kind of freedom: the absence of prejudice and pretentiousness. One might suggest that Americans’ lack of prejudice has to do with their lack of judgement. This would be unfair, but all things considered why should we not prefer that lightfooted solution to our heavy, pretentious one? Just look at this girl who serves you in the guest-room: she does so in total freedom, with a smile, without prejudice or pretentiousness, as though she were sitting opposite you. The situation is not an equal one, but she does not pretend to equality. Equality is part of the way of life here. Precisely the opposite of Sartre’s waiter, who is completely alienated from his representation and who only resolves the situation by calling on a theatrical metalanguage, by affecting in his gestures a freedom and an equality he does not really enjoy. Hence the unhappy intellectualism of his behaviour, which is shared, in our part of the world, by almost all social classes. This question of equality in mores, of freedom in mores has neither been resolved nor even properly posed within our culture. Only the political or philosophical question of equality has been posed and that keeps us locked in our eternal pretentiousness. In America - and this is a commonplace - you are astonished by the almost natural way status is forgotten, by the ease and freedom of personal relations. This ease may seem banal or vulgar to us, but it is never ridiculous. It is our affectation which is ridiculous. You only have to see a French family settling in on a Californian beach to feel the abominable weight of our culture. The American group remains open; the French unit immediately creates a closed space. The American child roams far and wide; the French one hovers around its parents. The Americans see to it that they stay well stocked with ice and beer; the French see to it that social niceties are observed, and that they keep up a theatricalshow of well-being. People move around a lot on American beaches; the Frenchman stays camped on his little sandy domain. The Frenchman makes quite a show on holiday, but the mediocrity of his petty-bourgeois space stays with him. Now, you can say anything you like about Americans, but they are neither mediocre nor petty-bourgeois. They certainly do not have aristocratic grace, but they have an ease that comes from space, the ease of those who have always had lots of space, and this makes up for a lack of manners or noble breeding. The freedom of bodily movement which this possession of space gives them easily compensates for the blandness of their features and character. Vulgar but ‘easy’. We are a culture of intimacy, which produces manners and affectation; they have a democratic culture of space. We are free in spirit, but they are free in their actions. The American moving around in the deserts or the national parks does not give the impression of being on holiday. Moving around is his natural occupation; nature is a frontier and a place for action. There is none of the flabby Romanticism and gallo-roman quietude that clutter up our free time. Nothing of the ‘holiday’ label, as it was invented in France by the Popular Front: the demoralizing atmosphere of free time snatched from the State, to be consumed in a plebeian spirit, with theatrical regard for one’s hard-earned leisure. Freedom here has no static or negative definition. Its definition is spatial and mobile. The great lesson of all this is that freedom and equality, like ease and grace, only exist where they are present from the outset. This is the surprise democracy had in store for us: equality is at the beginning, not at the end. That is the difference between egalitarianism and democracy: democracy presupposes equality at the outset, egalitarianism presupposes it at the end. ‘Democracy demands that all of its citizens begin the race even. Egalitarianism insists that they all finish even.’ However, when the obsession with judging others or with social prejudices has been left behind, there is greater tolerance, but greaterindifference too. No longer wishing others to see them, Americans end up not seeing one another. So people pass in the street without looking at one another, which may seem a mark of discretion and civility, but which is also a sign of indifference. At least this is not affected. It is both a quality and the absence of a quality. When I speak of the American ‘way of life’, I do so to emphasize its Utopian nature, its mythic banality, its dream quality, and its grandeur. That philosophy which is immanent not only in technological development but also in the exceeding of technology in its own excessive play, not only in modernity, but in the extravagance of modern forms (whether it be the vertical network of New York or the horizontal one of Los Angeles), not only in banality, but in the apocalyptic forms of banality, not only in the reality of everyday life, but in the hyperreality of that life which, as it is, displays all the characteristics of fiction. It is this fictional character which is so exciting. Now, fiction is not imagination. It is what anticipates imagination by giving it the form of reality. This is quite opposite to our own natural tendency which is to anticipate reality by imagining it, or to flee from it by idealizing it. That is why we shall never inhabit true fiction; we are condemned to the imaginary and to nostalgia for the future. The American way of life is spontaneously fictional, since it is a transcending of the imaginary in reality. Fiction is not abstraction either, and if America suffers from a kind of infirmity when it comes to abstraction, that incapacity takes on a glory all its own in the sprawling reality of middle America, in the apotheosis of daily life, in that empirical genius which so amazes us. Perhaps this successful revolution is no longer successful in the way Tocqueville understood it, as a spontaneous movement of the public mind, a form of spontaneous, concrete ordering of mores to modern values. It is not so much in the operation of institutions as in the freeing of technologies and images that the glorious form of American reality is to be found: in the immoral dynamic of images, in the orgy of goods and services, an orgy of power and useless energy (yet who can say where useful energy ends?), in which the spirit of advertising is more to the fore than Tocqueville’s public spirit. But these are, after all, the marks of its liberation, and the very obscenity of this society is the sign of its liberation. A liberation of all effects, some of them perfectly excessive and abject. But this is precisely the point: the high point of liberation, its logical outcome, is to be found in the spectacular orgy, speed, the instantaneity of change, generalized eccentricity. Politics frees itself in the spectacle, in the all-out advertising effect; sexuality frees itself in all its anomalies and perversions (including the refusal of sexuality, the latest fad, which is itself only a supercooling effect of sexual liberation); mores, customs, the body, and language free themselves in the ever quickening round of fashion. The liberated man is not the one who is freed in his ideal reality, his inner truth, or his transparency; he is the man who changes spaces, who circulates, who changes sex, clothes, and habits according to fashion, rather than morality, and who changes opinions not as his conscience dictates but in response to opinion polls. This is practical liberation whether we like it or not, whether or not we deplore its wastefulness and its obscenity. Moreover, people in ‘totalitarian’ countries know very well that this is true freedom and dream of nothing but fashion, the latest styles, idols, the play of images, travel for its own sake, advertising, the deluge of advertising. In short, the orgy. Now, you have to admit that it is America which has concretely, technologically achieved this orgy of liberation, this orgy of indifference, disconnection, exhibition, and circulation. I do not know what remains of the successful revolution Tocqueville speaks of, the revolution of political freedom and of the quality of public spirit (in this regard America today has both the best and the worst to offer), but it has certainly achieved this revolution, whereas we, having failed in our historical revolutions, our abstract revolutions, are in the process of failing in this other revolution too. We absorb these logicalconsequences of modernity, of this lifestyle revolution with all its inevitable excesses, in spite of ourselves, in homeopathic doses, with a mixture of fascination and resentment. We in Europe are stuck in the old rut of worshipping difference; this leaves us with a great handicap when it comes to radical modernity, which is founded on the absence of difference. Only very reluctantly do we become modern and in- different. This is why our own modernity is so lacklustre. This is why our undertakings lack the modern spirit. We do not even have the evil genius of modernity, that genius which pushes innovation to the point of extravagance and in so doing rediscovers a kind of fantastical liberty. Everything that has been heroically played out and destroyed in Europe in the name of Revolution and Terror has been realized in its simplest, most empirical form on the other side of the Atlantic (the Utopia of wealth, rights, freedom, the social contract, and representation). Similarly, everything we have dreamed in the radical name of anti-culture, the subversion of meaning, the destruction of reason and the end of representation, that whole anti-utopia which unleashed so many theoretical and political, aesthetic and social convulsions in Europe, without ever actually becoming a reality (May ‘68 is one of the last examples) has all been achieved here in America in the simplest, most radical way. Utopia has been achieved here and anti-utopia is being achieved: the anti-utopia of unreason, of deterritorialization, of the indeterminacy of language and the subject, of the neutralization of all values, of the death of culture. America is turning all this into reality and it is going about it in an uncontrolled, empirical way. All we do is dream and, occasionally, try and act out our dreams. America, by contrast, draws the logical, pragmatic consequences from everything that can possibly be thought. In this sense, it is naive and primitive; it knows nothing of the irony of concepts, nor the irony of seduction. It does not ironize upon thefuture or destiny: it gets on with turning things into material realities. To our Utopian radicalism it counterposes its empirical radicalism, to which it alone gives dramatically concrete form. We philosophize on the end of lots of things, but it is here that they actually come to an end. It is here, for example, that territory has ceased to exist (though there is indeed a vast amount of space), here that the real and the imaginary have come to an end (opening all spaces up to simulation). It is here, therefore, that we should look for the ideal type of the end of our culture. It is the American way of life, which we think naive or culturally worthless, which will provide us with a complete graphic representation of the end of our values - which has vainly been prophesied in our own countries - on the grand scale that the geographical and mental dimensions of Utopia can give to it. But is this really what an achieved Utopia looks like? Is this a successful revolution? Yes indeed! What do you expect a ‘successful’ revolution to look like? It is paradise. Santa Barbara is a paradise; Disneyland is a paradise; the US is a paradise. Paradise is just paradise. Mournful, monotonous, and superficial though it may be, it is paradise. There is no other. If you are prepared to accept the consequences of your dreams - not just the political and sentimental ones, but the theoretical and cultural ones as well - then you must still regard America today with the same naive enthusiasm as the generations that discovered the New World. That same enthusiasm which Americans themselves show for their own success, their own barbarism, their own power. If not, you have no understanding of the situation, and you will not be able to understand your own history - or the end of your history - either, because Europe can no longer be understood by starting out from Europe itself. The US is more mysterious: the mystery of American reality exceeds our fictions and our interpretations. The mystery of a society which seeks to give itself neither meaning nor an identity, which indulges neither in transcendence nor in aesthetics and which, for precisely that reason, invents the only great modern verticality in its buildings, which are the mostgrandiose manifestations within the vertical order and yet do not obey the rules of transcendence, which are the most prodigious pieces of architecture and yet do not obey the laws of aesthetics, which are ultra-modern and ultra-functional, but also have about them something non-speculative, primitive, and savage - a culture (or unculture) like this remains a mystery to us. We are at home with introversion and reflexion and with different effects of meaning coexisting under the umbrella of a concept. But the object freed from its concept, free to deploy itself in extraverted form, in the equivalence of all its effects. . . To us this is a total enigma. Extra version is a mystery to us in exactly the same way as the commodity was to Marx: the commodity, hieroglyph of the modern world, mysterious precisely because it is extraverted, a form realizing itself in its pure operation and in pure circulation (hello Karl!). In this sense, for us the whole of America is a desert. Culture exists there in a wild state: it sacrifices all intellect, all aesthetics in a process of literal transcription into the real. Doubtless the original decentring into virgin territory gave it this wildness, though it certainly acquired it without the agreement of the Indians whom it destroyed. The dead Indian remains the mysterious guarantor of these primitive mechanisms, even into the modern age of images and technologies. Perhaps the Americans, who believed they had destroyed these Indians, merely disseminated their virulence. They have opened up the deserts, threaded and criss-crossed them with their freeways, but by some mysterious interaction their towns and cities have taken on the structure and colour of the desert. They have not destroyed space; they have simply rendered it infinite by the destruction of its centre (hence these infinitely extendable cities). In so doing, they have opened up a true fictional space. In the ‘savage mind’, too, there is no natural universe,no transcendence of either man or nature, or of history. Culture is everything, or nothing, depending on how you look at it. You find this same absence of distinction between the two in modern simulation. There is no natural universe there either, and you cannot differentiate between a desert and a metropolis. It is not that the Indians were infinitely close to nature, nor that the Americans are infinitely distant from it: both belong to the ideality of nature, as they do to the ideality of culture, and both are also equally alien to nature and culture. , There is no culture here, no cultural discourse. No ministries, no commissions, no subsidies, no promotion. There is none of the sickly cultural pathos which the whole of France indulges in, that fetishism of the cultural heritage, nor of our sentimental - and today also statist and protectionist - invocation of culture. The Beaubourg would be impossible here, just as it would in Italy (for other reasons). Not only does centralization not exist, but the idea of a cultivated culture does not exist either, no more than that of a theological, sacred religion. No culture of culture, no religion of religion. One should speak rather of an ‘anthropological’ culture, which consists in the invention of mores and a way of life. That is the only interesting culture here, just as it is New York’s streets and not its museums or galleries that are interesting. Even in dance, cinema, the novel, fiction, and architecture, there is something wild in everything specifically American, something that has not known the glossy, high-flown rhetoric and theatricality of our bourgeois cultures, that has not been kitted out in the gaudy finery of cultural distinction. Here in the US, culture is not that delicious panacea which we Europeans consume in a sacramental mental space and which has its own special columns in the newspapers - and in people’s minds. Culture is space, speed, cinema, technology. This culture is authentic, if anything can be said to be authentic. This is not cinema or speed or technology as optional extra (everywhere in Europe you get a sense of modernity as somethingtacked on, heterogeneous, anachronistic). In America cinema is true because it is the whole of space, the whole way of life that are cinematic. The break between the two, the abstraction which we deplore, does not exist: life is cinema. That is why searching for works of art or sophisticated entertainment here has always seemed tiresome and out of place to me. A mark of cultural ethnocentrism. If it is the lack of culture that is original, then it is the lack of culture one should embrace. If the term taste has any meaning, then it commands us not to export our aesthetic demands to places where they do not belong. When the Americans transfer Roman cloisters to the New York Cloysters, we find this unforgivably absurd. Let us not make the same mistake by transferring our cultural values to America. We have no right to such confusion. In a sense, they do because they have space, and their space is the refraction of all others. When Paul Getty gathers Rembrandts, Impressionists, and Greek statues together in a Pompeian villa on the Pacific coast, he is following American logic, the pure baroque logic of Disneyland. He is being original; it is a magnificent stroke of cynicism, naivety, kitsch, and unintended humour - something astonishing in its nonsensicality. Now the disappearance of aesthetics and higher values in kitsch and hyperreality is fascinating, as is the disappearance of history and the real in the televisual. It is in this unfettered pragmatics of values that we should find some pleasure. If you simply remain fixated on the familiar canon of high culture, you miss the essential point (which is, precisely, the inessential). The advertisements which cut into the films on TV are admittedly an outrage, but they aptly emphasize that most television productions never even reach the ‘aesthetic’ level and are, basically, of the same order as advertisements. Most films - including many of the better ones - are made up from the same everyday romance: cars, telephones, psychology, make-up. They are purely and simply illustrations of the way of life. Advertising does just the same: it canonizes the way of life through images, making the whole a genuinely integrated circuit. And if everything on television is, without exception, part of a low-calorie (or even no-calorie) diet, then what good is it complaining about the adverts? By their worthlessness, they at least help to make the programmes around them seem of a higher level. Banality, lack of culture, and vulgarity do not have the same meaning here as they have in Europe. Or perhaps this is merely the crazy notion of a European, a fascination with an unreal America. Perhaps Americans are quite simply vulgar, and this meta-vulgarity is merely something I have dreamt up. Who knows? But I am inclined to suggest, in time-honoured fashion, that you have nothing to lose if I am wrong and everything to gain if I am right. The fact is that a certain banality, a certain vulgarity which seem unacceptable to us in Europe seem more than acceptable - even fascinating - to us here. The fact is that all our analyses in terms of alienation, conformism, standardization, and dehumanization collapse of themselves: when we look at America it is the analyses which seem vulgar. Why is a passage like the following (by G. Faye) both true and, at the same time, absolutely false? ‘California shines out as the total myth of our times. . . . Multiracialism, hegemonic technology, shrink-culture narcissism, urban criminality and audiovisual saturation: as super-America, California stands out as the absolute antithesis of authentic Europe . . from Hollywood to disco-pap, from ET to Star Wars, from the pseudo-rebellious itchings on the campuses to the ravings of Carl Sagan, from the neo-gnostics of Silicon Valley to the wind-surfing mystics, from the neo-Indian gurus to aerobics, from jogging to psychoanalysis as a form of democracy, from criminality as a form of psychoanalysis to television as an instrument of despotism, California has set itself up as the world centre of the simulacrum and the inauthentic, as the absolute synthesis of "cool" Stalinism. An hysterical land; focus and meeting-place for the rootless, California is the land of non-history, of the non-event, but at the same time the site of the constant swirl, the uninterrupted rhythm of fashion, that is to say, the site of tremors going nowhere, those tremors which so obsess it, constantly threatened as it is by earthquakes. ‘California has invented nothing: it has taken everything from Europe and served it up again in a disfigured, meaningless form, with an added Disneyland glitter. World centre of sweet madness, mirror of our dejecta and our decadence. Californitis, that hot variant of Americanism, is unleashing itself on the young of today and emerging as a mental form of AIDS. . . . To the revolutionary angst of the Europeans, California counterposes its long procession of fakes: the parody of science on the rite-less campus, the parody of cities and urbanism in the sprawl of Los Angeles, the parody of technology in Silicon Valley, the parody of oenology in its insipid Sacramento wines, the parody of religion in its gurus and sects, the parody of eroticism in its beach boys, the parody of drugs in its acids [?], the parody of sociability in its "communities". . . . Even nature in California is a Hollywood parody of ancient Mediterranean landscapes: a sea that is too blue [!?], mountains that are too rugged, a climate that is too gentle or too arid, an uninhabited disenchanted nature, deserted by the gods: a sinister land beneath a sun that is too bright. The expressionless face of our death, since Europe will surely die sunburnt and smiling, with its skin lightly baking under a holiday sun.’ All this is true (if you like), since the text itself resembles the hysterical stereotype it confers upon California. And it is surely easy to detect in Faye’s writing a degree of fascination with his subject. But if we could use precisely the same terms to say exactly the opposite of what he says, then this only emphasizes the point that, for his part, G. Faye was not able to effect this same reversal. He has not grasped how, at the edges of this meaningless world, this ‘sweet madness’ of meaninglessness, this soft, air-conditioned hell he describes, things turn into their opposites. He has not grasped the challenge of this ‘marginal transcendence’ in which precisely a whole universe is brought up against its margins, its ‘hysterical’ simulation - and why not? Why should Los Angeles not be a parody of cities? Why should Silicon Valley not parody technology? Why should there not be a parody of sociability, eroticism, and drugs, or even indeed a parody of the (too blue!) sea and the (too bright!) sun. Not to mention museums and culture. Of course all this is parody! If none of these values can bear to be parodied, it must mean they no longer have any importance. Yes, California (and America with it) is the mirror of our decadence, but it is not decadent at all. It is hyperreal in its vitality, it has all the energy of the simulacrum. ‘It is the world centre of the inauthentic.’ Certainly it is: that is what gives it its originality and power. The irresistible rise of the simulacrum is something you can simply feel here without the slightest effort. But has he ever been here? If he had, he would know that the key to Europe is not to be found in its past history, but in this crazy, parodic anticipation that is the New World. He cannot see that even though every detail of America may be abject or insignificant, it is the whole which passes our imagining - by the same token, every detail in his description may be accurate, but it is the whole which goes beyond the bounds of stupidity. What is new in America is the clash of the first level (primitive and wild) and the ‘third kind’ (the absolute simulacrum). There is no second level. This is a situation we find hard to grasp, since this is the one we have always privileged: the self-reflexive, self-mirroring level, the level of unhappy consciousness. But no vision of America makes sense without this reversal of our values: it is Disneyland that is authentic here! The cinema and TV are America’s reality! The freeways, the Safeways, the skylines, speed, and deserts - these are America, not the galleries, churches, and culture. . . Let us grant this country the admiration it deserves and open our eyes to the absurdity of some of our own customs. This is one of the advantages, one of the pleasures of travel. To see and feel America, you have to have had for atleast one moment in some downtown jungle, in the Painted Desert, or on some bend in a freeway, the feeling that Europe had disappeared. You have to have wondered, at least for a brief moment, ‘How can anyone be European?’  THE END OF US POWER? The fifties were the real high spot for the US (‘when things were going on’), and you can still feel the nostalgia for those years, for the ecstasy of power, when power held power. In the seventies power was still there, but the spell was broken. That was orgy time (war, sex, Manson, Woodstock). Today the orgy is over. The US, like everyone else, now has to face up to a soft world order, a soft situation. Power has become impotent. But if America is now no longer the monopolistic centre of world power, this is not because it has lost power, but simply because there is no centre any more. It has, rather, become the orbit of an imaginary power to which everyone now refers. From the point of view of competition, hegemony, and ‘imperialism’, it has certainly lost ground, but from the exponential point of view, it has gained some: take the unintelligible rise of the dollar, for example, which bears no relation to any economic supremacy, or the fabulous apotheosis of New York, or even - and why not? - the world-wide success of Dallas. America has retained power, both political and cultural, but it is now power as a special effect.In the image of Reagan, the whole of America has become Californian. Exactor and ex-governor of California that he is, he has worked up his euphoric, cinematic, extraverted, advertising vision of the artificial paradises of the West to all-American dimensions. He has introduced a system where the easy life exerts a kind of blackmail, reviving the original American pact of an achieved Utopia. It seems in fact that the ideal combination described by Tocqueville has come apart: though Americans have maintained a keen sense of individual interest, they do not seem to have preserved a sense of a meaning that could be collectively given to their undertakings. Hence the current crisis, which is deep-seated and real, and whose likely outcome seems to be a shift towards the rehabilitation of a collective principle, a set of values that would orient behaviour in a virtually spontaneous way and could present itself as an ideal resultant of all the various forces in play. What we see here is the success of Reagan’s illusionist effort to resurrect the American primal scene. ‘America is back again.’ Left brittle by the Vietnam War, which was as unintelligible to them as the irruption of little green men in a cartoon strip - and which, incidentally, they dealt with as though it were a cartoon, as something remote from them, a television war, with no understanding of the world’s condemnation of their actions and only able to see their enemy, since they are the achieved Utopia of goodness, as the achieved utopia of Evil, Communism - they have taken refuge in the tranquillity of the easy life, in a triumphal illusionism. This too is entirely Californian, for in reality it is not always sunny in California. You often get fog with the sun, or smog in Los Angeles. And yet you retain a sun-filled memory of the place, a sunny screen memory. This is what the Reagan mirage is like. Americans are no keener than anyone else today to think about whether they believe in the merits of their leaders, or even in the reality of power. That would take them on to much too tricky ground. They prefer to act asthough they believed in them, on condition that their belief is not taken too much for granted. Governing today means giving acceptable signs of credibility. It is like advertising and it is the same effect that is achieved -commitment to a scenario, whether it be a political or an advertising scenario. Reagan’s is both at once. It is also successful. Everything is in the credits. Now that society has been definitively turned into an enterprise, everything is in the synopsis of performance and enterprise, and its leaders must produce all the signs of the advertising ‘look’. The slightest failing becomes unpardonable, since the whole nation would be diminished by it. Even illness can become part of this ‘look’, as for example with Reagan’s cancer. By contrast, political weaknesses or stupidity are of no importance. Image alone counts. This consensus around simulation is much less fragile than is commonly thought, since it is far less exposed to any testing against political truth. All our modern governments owe a kind of political meta-stability to the regulation of public opinion by advertising. Mistakes, scandals, and failures no longer signal catastrophe. The crucial thing is that they be made credible, and that the public be made aware of the efforts being expended in that direction. The ‘marketing’ immunity of governments is similar to that of the major brands of washing powder. No one keeps count of the mistakes made by the world’s political leaders any more, mistakes which, in days gone by, would have brought about their downfall; no one much minds these now within our present system of simulation of government and of consensus through indifference. The people no longer take pride in their leaders and the leaders no longer pride themselves on their decisions. The tiniest bit of window-dressing is all that is needed to restore market confidence. Take, for example, the operation in Grenada, which followed the three hundred deaths in the Lebanon: risk-free scenario, calculated production, artificial event - success ensured. And the two events, Lebanon and Grenada, bore witness to the same politicalunreality: the one, a terrorist act, was completely beyond control; the other, a total fake, was too much under control. Neither had any meaning so far as the art of government is concerned. Both were equally vacuous, as empty as today’s political arena. There is this same self-advertisement, this same cult of the credit titles in the new Reagan generation. Dynamic and euphoric, or rather generating dynamism and spreading euphoria. They see neither happiness as a new idea, nor success as a compelling one, since they already have all these things. They are not the militants of happiness and success, but its sympathizers. The generation that has come from the sixties and seventies, but has rid itself of all nostalgia for, all bad conscience about, and even any subconscious memory of those wild years. The very last traces of marginality excised as if by plastic surgery: new faces, new fingernails, glossy brain-cells, the whole topped with a tousle of software. A generation neither fired by ambition nor fuelled by the energy of repression, but completely refocused upon themselves, in love with business not so much for profit or prestige as for its being a sort of performance, a technical feat. They hover around the media, advertising, and computing. They are not the ogres of business, but the footsloggers of showbiz, for business itself has become showbiz. ‘Clean and perfect.’ The Yuppies. Their joyous readaptation sings out in their very name. There has been no heart-rending reappraisal to separate them from the preceding generation, just an excision, an amnesia, an absolution - the mildly unreal process of forgetting that follows an event that is too intense to deal with. The Yuppies are not defectors from revolt, they are a new race, assured, amnestied, exculpated, moving with ease in the world of performance, mentally indifferent to any objective other than that of change and advertising (advertising everything: products, people, research, careers, lifestyle!). One might have expected the orgy of the sixties and seventies to throw up a mobile, disenchanted elite, but that has not been the case: the members of this elite, at least in their own publicity, see themselves as mobile and enchanted. Their enchantment takes mild forms: they are motivated, but not impassioned; whether in business, politics, or data-processing, they present themselves as cosily effective. Their slogan might well be: You can’t have your money and spend it too! You can’t have your cake and eat it too! You can’t eat your wife and fuck it too! You can’t live and have your living too!* But this easy life knows no pity. Its logic is a pitiless one. If Utopia has already been achieved, then unhappiness does not exist, the poor are no longer credible. If America is resuscitated, then the massacre of the Indians did not happen, Vietnam did not happen. While frequenting the rich ranchers or manufacturers of the West, Reagan has never had the faintest inkling of the poor and their existence, nor the slightest contact with them. He knows only the self-evidence of wealth, the tautology of power, which he magnifies to the dimensions of the nation, or indeed of the whole world. The have-nots will be condemned to oblivion, to abandonment, to disappearance pure and simple. This is ‘must exit’ logic: ‘poor people must exit.’ The ultimatum issued in the name of wealth and efficiency wipes them off the map. And rightly so, since they show such bad taste as to deviate from the general consensus. That poverty which was until recently being relieved, which was still * In English in original. [Tr.] within the orbit of subsidized socialization, has all now fallen within the scope of providential (presidential) decree. It is as though the Last Judgment had already happened. The good have been found virtuous, the others have been cast out. No need for good will any more. No need to feel guilty. The Third World, which no one mourns, has been obliterated. After all, it only served to give the rich a bad conscience and all efforts to save it were certain to end in failure. That is all over. Long live the Fourth World, the world to which you can say, ‘Right, Utopia has arrived. If you aren’t part of it, get lost!’, the world that no longer has the right to surface, the disenfranchised, who have no voice and are condemned to oblivion, thrown out to go off and die their second-class deaths. Disenfranchising. You lose your rights one by one, first your job, then your car. And when your driver’s licence goes, so does your identity. This way entire swathes of the population are falling into oblivion, being totally abandoned. Enfranchisement was an historical event: it was the emancipation of the serfs and slaves, the decolonization of the Third World and, in our societies, the various social and political rights: workers’ rights, the vote, sexual liberation and the rights of women, prisoners and homosexuals - things which today have been won everywhere. Human rights have been won everywhere. The world is almost entirely liberated; there is nothing left to fight for. And yet at the same time entire social groups are being laid waste from the inside (individuals too). Society has forgotten them and now they are forgetting themselves. They fall out of all reckoning, zombies condemned to obliteration, consigned to statistical graphs of endangered species. This is the Fourth World. Entire sectors of our modern societies, entire countries in the Third World now fall into this Fourth World desert zone. But whereas the Third World still had a political meaning (even if it was a resounding world-wide failure), the Fourth World has none. It is transpolitical. This is a result of our societies withdrawing political interest, of our advanced societieswithdrawing social interest, of that excommunication which affects precisely the communications-based societies. And it is true on a world scale. It can only be compared to the thousands of tons of coffee that were burnt in railway engines to keep up the world price. Or to those members of primitive tribes considered surplus to requirements who were led off like lemmings by some prophet, towards the ocean where they disappeared. The policies of governments are themselves becoming negative. They are no longer designed to socialize, to integrate, or to create new rights. Behind the appearance of socialization and participation they are desocializing, disenfranchising, and ejecting. The social order is contracting to include only economic exchange, technology, the sophisticated and innovative; as it intensifies these sectors, entire zones are ‘disintensified’, becoming reservations, and sometimes not even that: dumping grounds, wastelands, new deserts for the new poor, like the deserts you see forming around nuclear power stations or motorways. Nothing will be done to save them and perhaps nothing can be done, since enfranchisement, emancipation, and expansion have already taken place. There are therefore none of the elements here for a future revolution; what we see here are merely the inescapable results of an orgy of power, and an irreversible concentration of the world that has followed upon its extension. The only remaining question is this: what situation will result from this progressive disenfranchisement (which is already taking a violent turn under Reagan and Thatcher)? Reagan’s popularity gives us all food for thought. But we should first establish what type of confidence he is accorded. It is almost too good to be true. How can it be that every defence has fallen before him? How can it be that no mistake or political reversal damages his standing and that, paradoxically, his failures even improve it (which infuriates our French leaders, for whom things are the other way round: the more initiative and goodwill they show, the less popular they become). But the point is precisely that the confidence placed in Reagan is a paradoxical confidence. Just as we distinguish between real and paradoxical sleep, we should also distinguish between real and paradoxical confidence. The former is granted to a man or a leader on the basis of his qualities and his success. Paradoxical confidence is the confidence we place in someone on the basis of their failure or their absence of qualities. The prototype of this confidence is the failure of prophecy - a process that is well-known from the history of messianic and millenarian movements - following which the group, instead of denying its leader and dispersing, closes ranks around him and creates religious, sectarian, or ecclesiastical institutions to preserve the faith. Institutions all the more solid for deriving their energy from the failure of the prophecy. This ‘supplemental’ confidence never wavers, because it derives from the disavowal of failure. Such, making all due allowance, is the amazing aura that surrounds Reagan’s credibility, and which necessarily makes one think that the American prophecy, the grand prospect of Utopia on earth combined with world power, has suffered a setback; that something of that imaginary feat that was to crown the history of two centuries has precisely not been realized, and that Reagan is the product of the failure of that prophecy. In Reagan, a system of values that was formerly effective turns into something ideal and imaginary. The image of America becomes imaginary for Americans themselves, at a point when it is without doubt profoundly compromised. This transformation of spontaneous confidence into paradoxical confidence and an achieved Utopia into an imaginary hyperbole seems to me to mark a decisive turning-point. But doubtless things are not this simple. For I am not saying that the image of America is deeply altered in the eyes of the Americans themselves. I am not saying that this change of direction in the Reagan era is anything other than an incidental development. Who knows? You have the same difficulty today distinguishing between a process and its simulation, for example between a flight and a flight simulation. America, too, has entered this era of undecidability: is it still really powerful or merely simulating power? Can Reagan be considered the symbol of present-day American society - a society which, having once possessed the original features of power, is now perhaps at the face-lift stage? Another hypothesis might be that America is no longer what it was, but is continuing on its course; its power has entered a phase of hysteresis. Hysteresis: the process whereby something continues to develop by inertia, whereby an effect persists even when its cause has disappeared. We may speak, in this sense, of a hysteresis of history, a hysteresis of socialism, and so on. The whole thing continues to function like a body in motion by virtue of the speed it has already gathered or by inertia-steering, or like an unconscious man still remaining on his feet, by sheer force of equilibrium. Or, in more comic vein, like the cyclist in Jarry’s Supermale, who has died of exhaustion on the incredible trip across Siberia, but who carries on pedalling and propelling the Great Machine, his rigor mortis transformed into motive power. A superb fiction, for the dead are perhaps even capable of going quicker, of keeping the machine going better than the living since they no longer have any problems. Might America not be like Jarry’s five-man bicycle? But here again, though it seems quite clear the American machine has suffered something like a break in the current, or a breaking of the spell, who can say whether this is the product of a depression or of a supercooling of the machinery? America is certainly suffering less than Europe from the phase of convalescence that grand ideas are going through or from the decline in historical passions, for these are not the motor of its development. It is, however, suffering from the disappearance of ideologies that might contest its power and from the weakening of all the forces that previously opposed it. It was more powerful in the two decades after the Second World War, but so too were the ideas and passions ranged against it. The American system could be violently attacked (even from within in the sixties and seventies).Today, America no longer has the same hegemony, no longer enjoys the same monopoly, but it is, in a sense, uncontested and uncontestable. It used to be a world power; it has now become a model (business, the market, free enterprise, performance) - and a universal one - even reaching as far as China. The international style is now American. There is no real opposition any more; the combative periphery has now been reabsorbed (China, Cuba, Vietnam); the great anti-capitalist ideology has been emptied of its substance. All in all, the same consensus is forming around the US in the world at large as has developed around Reagan at home. A credibility effect, an advertising effect, the potential adversary losing its defences. This is the way things have gone for Reagan. Little by little, everything facing him, everything opposing him has faded away, without it being possible to credit him with any personal political genius. Consensus by effusion, by an elision of the oppositional elements and the margins. Political decline, but PR ascendancy. It’s the same for the US on a planetary scale. American power does not seem inspired by any spirit or genius of its own (it works by inertia, in an ad hoc fashion, in the void, hampered by its own strength). Yet, on the other hand, the country indulges in a kind of promotional hype. America has a sort of mythical power throughout the world, a power based on the advertising image, which parallels the polarization of advertising images around Reagan. It is in this way, by this kind of added value, of exponential, self-referential, though ultimately unfounded credibility, that an entire society becomes stabilized beneath a perfusion of advertising. The flooding of the dollar on the world marketplace is the symbol and finest example of this. Yet it is a fragile meta-stability, as much externally as on the domestic political stage. For, in the last resort, it is due to the evaporation of any real alternative, to the disappearance of resistances and antibodies. This is the real crisis of American power, that of a potential stabilization by inertia, of an assumption of power in a vacuum. In many respects it resembles the lossof immune defences in an overprotected organism. That is why I feel there is a poetic irony in Reagan contracting cancer. In its form, cancer is somewhat similar to that transparent credibility, that euphoria of a body no longer producing antibodies and threatened with destruction by an excess of functionality. The leader of the greatest world power struck down by cancer! Power in the grip of metastases! The two poles of our civilization meet here. The end of presidential immunity. It will be AIDS next! This should mark the beginning of a general implosion (in the Eastern bloc, political power has long been in the grip of necrosis). But we are going a bit quickly; we should perhaps rather speak of a menopause. An abatement of the fever in the public mind, a general realignment after the convulsions of the seventies, no more ‘new frontiers’, a conservative image-conscious management of things, steady, unambitious performativity with no thought of the future, austerity and physical training, business and jogging, the end of the mad whirl and the orgy, the restoration of a sort of naturalist Utopia of the enterprise and a bio-sociological conservation of the race - does all this signify the end of the glories of potency, and the onset of the hysterical euphoria of the menopause? Or, once again, is the Reagan phase merely a temporary period of convalescence, a revival after a breakdown, but one presaging further developments. Yet no ‘new frontier’, no new ‘Kennedy philosophy’ seems thinkable today. Indeed, that is what has changed so profoundly in the atmosphere of America: the Reagan effect has sapped the nation’s energy. Having said that, this menopause effect is not peculiar to America. It can be seen in all the Western democracies and it is wreaking its havoc everywhere, in culture as well as in politics, in individual emotions and in ideological passions. One can only hope that as we enter that third phase that is old age, we shall also see some close encounters of the third kind (wehave already known the debauched excess of middle age - fascism). As for American reality, even the face-lifted variety retains its vast scope, its tremendous scale, and, at the same time, an unspoilt rawness. All societies end up wearing masks. Why not the mask of Reagan? But what remains intact is what was there at the beginning: space and the spirit of fiction.   DESERT FOR EVER The sunsets are giant rainbows lasting for an hour. The seasons here make no sense: in the morning it is spring, at noon it is summer, and the desert nights are cold without it ever being winter. It is a kind of suspended eternity in which the year is renewed daily, with the guarantee that it will be like this each day, that every evening will be that rainbow of all the colours of the spectrum in which light, after having reigned all day long in its indivisible form, in the evening fragments into all the nuances of colour that make it up, before it finally disappears. Nuances which are already those of the instant rainbow catching fire in the wind on the crest of the Pacific waves. This is the invulnerable grace of the climate, privilege of a nature that completes that insane richness that is man’s. This country is without hope. Even its garbage is clean, its trade lubricated, its traffic pacified. The latent, the lacteal, the lethal - life is so liquid, thesigns and messages are so liquid, the bodies and the cars so fluid, the hair so blond, and the soft technologies so luxuriant, that a European dreams of death and murder, of suicide motels, of orgies and cannibalism to counteract the perfection of the ocean, of the light, of that insane ease of life, to counteract the hyperreality of everything here. Hence the phantasy of a seismic fracture and a crumbling into the Pacific, which would be the end of California and of its criminal and scandalous beauty. For it is unbearable, while one is still alive, to pass beyond the difficulty of being, simply to pass into the fluidity of sky, cliffs, surf, and deserts, into the hypothesis of happiness alone. But even the seismic challenge is still only a flirtation with death; it still forms part of the natural beauty, as do history or revolutionary theory, whose hyperrealist echoes come here to die with the discreet charm of something from a previous existence. All that remains of a violent and historical demand is this graffiti on the beach, facing out to sea, no longer calling upon the revolutionary masses, but speaking to the sky and the open space and the transparent deities of the Pacific: PLEASE, REVOLUTION! And yet is it irrelevant that the largest naval base, that of the Pacific 7th Fleet - the very incarnation of American world-wide domination and the greatest firepower in the world - also contributes to this insolent beauty? In the very place where the beautiful magic of Santa Ana blows, the desert wind that crosses over the mountains to stay for four or five days, before scattering the Fog, scorching the earth, making the sea sparkle, and crushing those who are used to the mist - the most beautiful thing about the Santa Ana is spending the night on the beach, swimming there as if it were daytime, and tanning, like vampires, under the moonlight. This country is without hope. We fanatics of aesthetics and meaning, of culture, of flavour and seduction, we who see only what is profoundly moral as beautiful and for whom only the heroic distinction between nature and culture is exciting, we who are unfailingly attached to the wonders of critical sense and transcendence find it a mental shock and a unique release to discover the fascination of nonsense and of this vertiginous disconnection, as sovereign in the cities as in the deserts. To discover that one can exult in the liquidation of all culture and rejoice in the consecration of in-difference. I speak of the American deserts and of the cities which are not cities. No oases, no monuments; infinite panning shots over mineral landscapes and freeways. Everywhere: Los Angeles or Twenty-Nine Palms, Las Vegas or Borrego Springs. . . No desire: the desert. Desire is still something deeply natural, we live off its vestiges in Europe, and off the vestiges of a moribund critical culture. Here the cities are mobile deserts. No monuments and no history: the exaltation of mobile deserts and simulation. There is the same wildness in the endless, indifferent cities as in the intact silence of the Badlands. Why is LA, why are the deserts so fascinating? It is because you are delivered from all depth there - a brilliant, mobile, superficial neutrality, a challenge to meaning and profundity, a challenge to nature and culture, an outer hyperspace, with no origin, no reference-points. No charm, no seduction in all this. Seduction is elsewhere, in Italy, in certain landscapes that have become paintings, as culturalized and refined in their design as the cities and museums that house them. Circumscribed, traced-out, highly seductive spaces where meaning, at these heights of luxury, has finally become adornment. It is exactly the reverse here: there is no seduction, but there is an absolute fascination - the fascination of the very disappearance of all aesthetic and critical forms of life in the irradiation of an objectless neutrality. Immanent and solar. The fascination of the desert: immobility without desire. Of Los Angeles: insane circulation without desire. The end of aesthetics. It is not just the aesthetics of decor (of nature or architecture) that vanishes into thin air, but the aesthetics of bodies and language, of everything that forms the European’s - especially the Latin European’s - mental and social habitus, that continual commedia dell’arte, the pathos and rhetoric of social relations, the dramatization of speech, the subtle play of language, the aura of make-up and artificial gesture. The whole aesthetic and rhetorical system of seduction, of taste, of charm, of theatre, but also of contradictions, of violence always reappropriated by speech, by play, by distance, by artifice. Our universe is never desert-like, always theatrical. Always ambiguous. Always cultural, and faintly ridiculous in its hereditary culturally. What is arresting here is the absence of all these things - both the absence ofarchitecture in the cities, which are nothing but long tracking shots of signals, and the dizzying absence of emotion and character in the faces and bodies. Handsome, fluid, supple, or cool, or grotesquely obese, probably less as a result of compulsive bulimia than a general incoherence, which results in a casualness about the body or language, food or the city: a loose network of individual, successive functions, a hypertrophied cell tissue proliferating in all directions. Thus the only tissue of the city is that of the freeways, a vehicular, or rather an incessant transurbanistic, tissue, the extraordinary spectacle of these thousands of cars moving at the same speed, in both directions, headlights full on in broad daylight, on the Ventura Freeway, coming from nowhere, going nowhere: an immense collective act, rolling along, ceaselessly unrolling, without aggression, without objectives - transferential sociality, doubtless the only kind in a hyperreal, technological, soft-mobile era, exhausting itself in surfaces, networks, and soft technologies. No elevator or subway in Los Angeles. No verticality or underground, no intimacy or collectivity, no streets or facades, no centre or monuments: a fantastic space, a spectral and discontinuous succession of all the various functions, of all signs with no hierarchical ordering - an extravaganza of indifference, extravaganza of undifferentiated surfaces - the power of pure open space, the kind you find in the deserts. The power of the desert form: it is the erasure of traces in the desert, of the signified of signs in the cities, of any psychology in bodies. An animal and metaphysical fascination - the direct fascination of space, the immanent fascination of dryness and sterility. The mythical power of California consists in this mixture of extreme disconnection and vertiginous mobility captured in the setting, the hyperrealscenario of deserts, freeways, ocean, and sun. Nowhere else does there exist such a stunning fusion of a radical lack of culture and natural beauty, of the wonder of nature and the absolute simulacrum: just in this mixture of extreme irreferentiality and deconnection overall, but embedded in most primeval and great-featured natural scenery of deserts and ocean and sun - nowhere else is this antagonistic climax to be found.* Elsewhere, sites of natural beauty are heavy with meaning, with nostalgia, and the culture itself is unbearable in its seriousness. The strong cultures (Mexico, Japan, Islam) reflect back to us the image of our degraded one, and the image of our profound guilt. The surplus of meaning in a strong, ritual, territorial culture turns us into gringos, zombies, tourists kept under house arrest in the country’s natural beauty spots. No such thing in California, where there is total rigour, for culture itself is a desert there, and culture has to be a desert so that everything can be equal and shine out in the same supernatural form. This is why even the flight from London to Los Angeles, passing over the pole, is, in its stratospheric abstraction and its hyperreality, already part of California and the deserts. Deterritorialization begins with the disconnection of night and day. When their division is no longer a matter of time, but of space, altitude, and speed, and occurs cleanly, as if vertically, when you pass through the night as if it were a cloud, so fast that you can see it, as if it * Italicized section in English in original. [Tr.] were a nearby object revolving around the earth, or, by contrast, when it is reduced to nothing, the sun remaining at the same point in the sky for all twelve hours of the flight, then this already marks the end of our space-time, that same enchanted reality which will be that of the West. The wonder of the heat is metaphysical. The very colours - pastel blue, mauve, lilac - are the products of a slow, geological, timeless combustion. The mineral quality of the earth breaks through the surface in the crystalline flora. All the natural elements here have known their ordeal by fire. The desert is no longer a landscape, it is a pure form produced by the abstraction of all others. Its definition is absolute, its frontier initiatory, its ridges steep, its contours cruel. It is a place of signs of an imperious necessity, an ineluctable necessity - but void of all meaning, arbitrary and inhuman, and one crosses it without deciphering them. Irrevocable transparency. The towns of the desert also end abruptly; they have no surround. And they have about them something of the mirage, which may vanish at any instant. You have only to see Las Vegas, sublime Las Vegas, rise in its entirety from the desert at nightfall bathed in phosphorescent lights, and return to the desert when the sun rises, after exhausting its intense, superficial energy all night long, still more intense in the first light of dawn, to understand the secret of the desert and the signs to be found there: a spellbinding discontinuity, an all- enveloping, intermittent radiation. The secret affinity between gambling and the desert: the intensity of gambling reinforced by the presence of the desert all around the town. Theair- conditioned freshness of the gaming rooms, as against the radiant heat outside. The challenge of all the artificial lights to the violence of the sun’s rays. Night of gambling sunlit on all sides; the glittering darkness of these rooms in the middle of the desert. Gambling itself is a desert form, inhuman, uncultured, initiatory, a challenge to the natural economy of value, a crazed activity on the fringes of exchange. But it too has a strict limit and stops abruptly; its boundaries are exact, its passion knows no confusion. Neither the desert nor gambling are open areas; their spaces are finite and concentric, increasing in intensity toward the interior, toward a central point, be it the spirit of gambling or the heart of the desert - a privileged, immemorial space, where things lose their shadow, where money loses its value, and where the extreme rarity of traces of what signals to us there leads men to seek the instantaneity of wealth. IIII A an II II trIInImItIIii-mumhtaf IIIIIIIInittI-Il in the United StaIestttIIiI-sIQ y any meIInI or InIItrIIIIIenI-Iglity m‘ ItterItIItc or l'oreign commerce any - IIIIicIIl prIIpIIeIInIIIIInt or in the interests I‘ I'IIIh lore'rgnprincipal III in 'IIheI'I-mnnI ' rint "I III) in am othet Iorm which i.I .III‘I’IIIIIhIIIIIIIIpteIIto heing.or whiIh lte _llI-II-I IIIII he.or ,whichhe intendsto he: III'IeIIIIItIIIeII III I irctIIIIterlIIIttIIIIg two or me 1.1I'rIImI.IIIIIII. not later than Inrty- ieht lIIIIIrI IIl’-IIr the beginning of the IIIIIInittal thIII-IIF. file IIIth the Attorney etterIII tIIII eupieI thereof and II Itate- em. IIIII) ItgnI‘II h) III on lIte hehatll III clt IIeI-Itt.Iettitte t'oIth IIIII information III ortlte IIIIIII‘I. time. . IInIl extIItt oi IIIIh ' rIIIIIIIIItIIII. -Iet’_\_'perIIIIt IItlhtn IIII‘ I t_tIlI'dSIIIII.I IIhIi I an agent III II lorIien priIIIipIIl IIIIII qutireII III regitlet' under the pun iImnI III I II AI‘I'IIIIII {Iho trIIttItttitI III' I'IIIIIeI to he IIItttItttilIeII in the l‘ttiletl StItte'I tttItIII or y-IIIty IIIeIInI-IIr InItrIIIIteIItIIIIty III nterItIIII‘ or foreign I'oIItItterI'I- IIIIy . IlitIcIIl mIpIIgIIIIIIIt I'IIr or in the iIIterI-ItI t' II'II'IIl'I-IreignprIIIprIIl (it in the t'ortn nt' II.I" ,Itr .IIil in IIIIy other l'orIII wltII'h iI 'ItItttIahly atI-IIthcIIIt) being, or which he -‘IIIWchII-III he. or thI'lI ltg iIIteIIIII to he. IIII'nIinIItI'IIor I irIIIlIIIeIIItntnttgI\\II or tore pIrIIIItI IIIIIII. not' lI-'ItIr tItItIt lort_I- ieltl lIItItI'I alter the hI gittttitt" III thI .IInIntttIIIl IltereI-It.file IIIIII the Attumey ienI‘rtIl tun IjIIpIeI tltereul IIIIII II ItIIte- _e.Itt.'I‘IIIIy .IIgttI'II III or on the helm“ ul ttclt Itgettt.(LINN):forth lIIlI inlonItIItiIIII III I "II' plItI'II'I tiIIIeI illIII. IIlettI III ItIIlt IInIIItittIII. IIery pINItt IIIIhitt the I Ittted‘StIneIIIIIII _IIII Itgtnl III II loreieII ptiIIIipIII ,IIIII quitI'II _tIIregivltertttIIIer thI prIII iIIIIIII III iI AtI-IIIIII IIhIt trIIItItttiII III“I'IIIIII'I to he aImIIIttttI-II in the I'niteII StIIteI IIIIIIII or .‘ any means In iItItrIItIIeIttIIIIty III 'Iet'<tItIe' «r foreign I'I‘IIIIIIL‘I'Le IIIIy tIitIIIIl propagandaIN or In theIIItereIII Inch lurctgtt prInI'IpIII tiI in the lurIIt nt' III" or III) IIIIIItIy other Iorm IIIIIIlI II. ?QNOHIII‘I‘VIIIIIII-IteIlto being. nr II-IIIIII III- 'III‘\ eI “III be. m which he IIIteIIIII In he. iI'II'tttinItleII ttt‘ I'itI'ttlItt'I-II Imtnttg tIIn Ill‘ Iore pI-rIIInI IltIIll. not later IIIIIII IIIIII- igltt IIIIIIII alter the hegIIIItiItg III the attImiltIII tlIeII‘IIl'. I'III' IIitlt the .-\ttuIIII-_I iettI‘raI lwIt L'UPIIWIIIICICI‘I and II ItIIle tent. duly IigIIeII h_IIII' on the helm“ ul uI'II agent. IettIItg Illl'III lull iIIIurmIItIun III IIIIII‘ |II'III I‘I. lttttI°\. :ttttl I'\II'tIl III IttIII IIIIIIItIttIIl. _ l ' W hr Iii-I it'I thy otherform which is remma‘hly adaptedto heirtg. or which he helieveI will he. or which he-intends.to he. IliIIeminIItI-II or circulated IImIIng two or mere perIonI IhIIll. not later than torty- eight ltotIrI after the beginningot’ the traIIIntittIII thereof. l'Ile with the Attnrttey General No eopIeI thereof IIIIII II I-IIIte- ment. IIIII_I IIgIIeII by or on the behalf of .Ittch«gent.Ietting l'otth l'IIll inl'ortttIItion III to the plIII'cI. times. and L‘\IL‘III ol \IIL'II trIIIIIItIittIIl. mam III theBMW ‘~‘ I' by any 'nteIIn-I or ihstrumentality pf- ' interstate or foreign commerce titty. political propagandafor or in.the interests ' of I-ueltforeignprincipal(i) in theIIImIOI: print or tiit in any other form ‘which is reIIIonIIblyadaptedto being.or whichhe believes will he. III which he intendI to he. III\\ClIllnillI‘(Il-.(Il'circulated among two or more perIoIII IIIIIll. not later than forty": eight lIoIIrI after the beginning of the trIInImitlIIl thereol. l'Ile IIitlt the Attorney ‘IIPnnt'w '1‘ W‘Nl" I3} Icesonlhly adapted.l0 being. Onwh Metres willhe.at which intends ' atedor Cl ulatedIamongI .time: sIbIII not III r thttq' . I Sight hours'after the hegi ning‘_5 transmittalthereof.file with he«A_n I General No copies Inyi'eol It .1. ment.duly Iignedhy oronni; - I suchagent.Iettingt'ortltfullinformH \to the placeI.times andextentI)" IrItnIInittIII. ' THEECSTACY0F COMMUNICAT0N7II‘") l‘cI'ImI \IItlIin tIIe I'ItiteIIStIIteI IIlIII iI IIII .Igent III II lmeigtt III'iIII'ipIIl IIIIII t'I'IlttitI‘II III II'gIIIcI' under the pt'III'iIiunI III tItII AI‘I IIIIII \Iltu II'IIIIIIIIIII nt' I'IIIIIeI III he tI'IIIIIIIIIIItthI III the l'IIiteIl StIIch IIIIIIII III' III IIIt_I IIIL‘IIIII In' III\IHIIIII‘IIIIIIII_\ III iIIlcrItIIte III' IIII'I-ign I‘IIIIIIIIerI'e IIII_\ pnIIIIIIII prIIpIIeIIIIIIII “W or In the IIIlereItI III IIII'II lnreIeII principal (I) III the Inn" III print or (III III .III_IntlIer Iorm IIlIiIlI II reIIIIIIIIIIIIy IIIIIIpteIl to being. III' IIlIiI'h III‘ IK‘III'H‘I “III III‘. III \\ItIIII III‘ IIIII‘nIII III III‘. IIIIIeIItiIIIItI-Il nr IiII'IIIIIteIl .Itttnng tun «II' more peIIIIIII IIIIIII. not later than l'IIIt_I- I‘Igltl IIIIIlr\ III'II‘r tltI‘ IteeIIIIIIIIg: III' the II.IIIIIIIIIIIII IIII'II‘UI. lile “IIII the Attorney (iI'ItI‘t'IIl I\\'II I‘npteI IIII‘I‘I'III IIIIII It IIIIII‘- tIteIIl. IIIII_\ ItenI-II III nr IIII the helm“ III \III'II ilL‘I'lII. I-I‘tttne I'III1II lull iIIl'III'InIItInII III In lhe pIIIII'I. lItII-I'I. I'tttII I'III'III III IttI'It II'IIIIIIIIIIIIII. I'.\L‘l'_\ peIIun \IIIIIIII the l'IIIteIl SIIIteI IIltII iI I'IlI .Igent III II t'oI’I-Ign III'IIIL'IPI‘IIIIIIII I'I'IIIIIII-Iltn lI':.'I\IL'I IIIIIII'I the pun IIiIInI ul' IIIII .-\I'l and “III! II'IlII\lIIII\ Ul' I'I'IttIeI II) he tt‘IIIIItIIIIIttI'II In the l IIIIeII SIIIII‘I IIIIIIII III III .III\' IIIeIIIII m- inItI'IIIneIIIIIIItI nl' JEAN BAUDRl-LLARD / em. I'Itlly IIgIII‘Il hy or on the helm” III II'II .Igcttt. II'tttIIg_I'IIrtltIIIII iIIlIIItIIIItIIIII III the pIIIIeI. mom. and eIteIIt nl' IIII'II IIIIIIInltIII. . I N} 'II-IIIIII \\ llIIIII the I 'mteIl StuteI IIIIII IIII .Ieent ot II tItrIIgtt pIiIIIipIIl IIItIl. qunIII tn lI‘L‘hII‘ r ttItIlIr the prm IIiIItII III iI' AII .IIIII IIlIo trIIIIItttItI or IIIIIIII to he 'IIIIIIIIIIIII'II III the l IIIthI StIIteI IIIItIlI III .IIII means of iIIItrmIII-Itt.tlit_I III terItIIte, III lnretgtt I'ItllllnI‘II'L' .III_I IlitiIIIl prIIpIIgIIIIIIIIIN or in the IIItcreItI IIII It Int'eIgIIpIIIIcipIII III III the Iorm of. till "I llll III any other IIIIIII'IIhich II' II.II-IIIIIIII adaptedto being. or IIhiclt Ite _Iie\eI \Iill he. Ivt IIIIII'h lte ItttetIIII III he. IIeItIiIIIIteIl III III'IIIlItteII Itmottg tIIII III nre perImII IhIIll. IIIII later than t'IIIt_I 'III' hIIIIrI alter the beginning «I the ItIIII'IIIIIIthereot‘.tile II'itlt‘th'eAIIIIIIIII'} 'IterItI two I'IIpIeI thereof and II-state- -.m.IIII‘II IIeneIl by or on the MIMI «I 'II ItuIIII. II'tlItIg'IIInIt hm illi't'niwln III; IIII plItIIN. lttltth. IIIKI' eIt‘em MM... lt'ItttIttIIl ‘ . . erI pemttt IIIllIItt the?luite‘tj3' unth'” t'chIIIeIl to I'egiItet'under the pt'oI'IIiItIII III' "III Act and “IIU tI'IIIIIIIIitI ur I'IIIIIeI to he trIIIIIIIIIIitleII III the l'ttiteIl SlIIteI IIIIIilI or III any "team or iItItrIIIIIeIttItlily ol' iIIterItIIte III I'oreten commerce any pItliliIIII pIanIgItnIIII IUI'or itt the ink reItI ul IItI It lorIigII principal II) in the lnrttt 01 print or (in in 'II") Ittltet It'l‘lll IIlIiI'lt II reIIIIIIIIIny IIIIIIpteII tn being. or which he , helieI'eI II i" he. or IIIIII'h he ItttertIII to he. IIiIIemiItateIl Itr eIrI'IIIIIted among two or more perIonI I'ltall. not later than t'nrty- eight hIIurI alter the beginning ol the tt'IIttI'ntittIII thereof. file with the Attomey (ietterIII Iwu Copies thereof and II IlIIle- Ittettt. duly signed by or on the behalf of Ittclt agent.Ietting forth full iItI'IImIIItIoIIIII to the places. tIIIIeI-I and mum of .IttI'h It'anIIIIittaI. liverypersonIIithin theUnitedStaIeIwho i-I an agent of atforeign principal and III registerunder the pun I.IionI III thigh“ andwhotmmIit‘I or I IIII.IeIto he WWII III lb?I 'tt'itI‘IISIIIteIImtilIor 1Q:M W m instrumentaliu III“ EIMIIMS‘II‘I? am” l-. '...I.;~iLwIIL 'II’ cit (icIIerIIl two copieI thereOI'and It IlItle- .ment. duly .IigIII-II by nr on the behalf qt IIII'It IIgI'IIl. .Iettittg forth I'uII information as to the platen. tIIneI. IInII extient III' .Iuclt tIIIIIIIIIiltIII. I liver} peIIoII II ithin the United Stateswho iI :Il‘l‘ilgL‘III III II foreign principal and requiIeIl to regiIter under the proviIionI of t_JtiIAct and who trItnIttIitI or causesto he I-"IrIIIInImitteII In the United StateI maiII' or III any IIIeIIIII or iIIItrumentality of iIIterItIItI- or foreign commerce any political propagandafor or in the inteteI'tI of such Inreigtt prIIteipIII tit in the form of print or IiI) in any other form which is reIIIonIIhly adapted to being. or which he helieI'eI-will he. or which he intendsIII he. IliIII-IniIIIItI-Il or I'Irculated among two or more perIoItI shall. not later than I'nrty- eiglt linurI alter the beginning of the IrIInIIIIittIIl thereof. nle with the Attorney (IL‘IICI‘lIItwo copies thereof and a slate- ment. duly signed by nr on the behalf of melt agent.Ietting l'orth full infortt’tationII.I to the plIIceI. tiIItI-I. and extent of .Iuch Il‘IlIhlIlIIIuI. Exery peI'IotI II ithin Ilte Ut‘lilcd Slateswho iI an agent of II foreign principal and rI'IIIIiII-Ilto'regIIter-undertheprovisionsof. IIIII Act and who trIInImitI' or eauIeI to he trIIIIItIIItitIeII in the United StateI' mails or by any means or iIIItruntetttItlity pf interItate In forum commerce Itny puliIiI-III propagandafor m in the inteIeII'II ot‘ .Iuch foreign principal (it in the form "I pl’llll or (III in any Ittlter form which iI' reIIIonIIny adapted to being. or which he .belieI'eI' II ill he. or which he intendsto he. IIIIIemiIIIIted or ctreuIIIteII among two or more perIonI .IhIIII. nIIt later than forty- eight hottrI after the beginning of the trIIIIIItIittIIl thereof. tile with the Attomey General two eopieI thereof and II Item- Inettt. IIIIly .Iigtted by or an the behalf of I'tII'lt agent.I'ettiitg I‘ortlt full information II.I to the places. times. and eIteItt ot' .Iuclt trItnIIItittItlI Every perIon within the United Stateswho i.I an agent of II foreign principal and II‘IIIIII'I'II to regiI-terundirr the proVIIionI-of this Act and who Il'IImIIIIIlSor causeItIt he trIIIIIIInIitteIIin theUnitedStateI'mailsor by any means or InItruntentIIlity of IIIterItIIte or—foreign commerce any political propagandafor or in the intereIts of web foreign principal III III the form III" print or Hit in any other I'ottn which is reIIIoIIIIhly IIIlIIpteII III being. or which he belieI-eI-will he. or II hieh he intendsto be. diIIemittIIted or circulated among two or more perI'onI- .Ihall. not later than forty- eight hourI after the beginning III the trIIItIntittal thereof. tile with the Attorney (ieneral two copieI thereof and II .I'tIIte- mettt. IIIIly Iigned by or on the hehIIIf ol' ' Iuch agent.setting forth IIIIl'mt'orntIItiIm II.I III the plueeI. times. and I‘.\lI‘t1l or Iueh t‘rIIIIIInittaL _Every permit within the United StateI'who iI IIII II' Int II.III I’IIrei‘II. I incial and EIery [X'IN'OI'Iwithin the United Stat. i.I an agent of II foreign principa required to register under the proviIi thiI Act and who tI'ImIIIIitI or causes trIIIIItIItIittcd inthe liIIIIeII Statesme by any means or iItItruntI-ntali interItIIte or foreign commerce political propagandafor or in the in' of Iuch l'oreIgItprincipal (it in the f print or (iilitt any other form whi reIII'onIIbly adapted to being. or whi believeswill he. or which he intends diIIeIItinItteIl or circulated among t more persons Ihall. not later than‘ eight hours after the beginning ‘IranImitt-IIIthereof. nle with the An Generaltwo c'opieIthereolanda Ittent. IIuly IigneIl by or on the beh .IIIchagent..Iettingtonh full itttormat to the places.tInIeI'.'andextentof transmittal. ‘EI-ety perIon within the UnIteIl State. i.I an agent of 'II foreign principa required to register under the provisi thiI Act andwhotransmitsor causes. trIIIInImitteII in the United State»m by any IneIIItI or inItruntentali interItItte or foreign commerce political propagandafor or in the int of such l'oteign principal ti) in the III print or (iiiin any other form wh' 'IIIonIIth adapted to being. or whi believeswill he. or which he intends IlisIemiIIIItI-IIor_circulatedamongt more perIIInI IltIIll. not later than. eight hours Itl'ter'the beginning I tI'IIttImittItl thereof. file with the Alt General two copies thereof and a Ittent. Ilttly .IigneIl by or on the be suchagent..Iettingforth full'informat to the places. times. and extent 0 transmittal.- Every peI'Ion within the United State i.I an agent of II foreign principa required to register under the proviIi IIIiI' Act IIIIII who trItnIItntsor causes trIIIInIInitteIl in the United StatesIQ by any means or inI'trumentalt iIIterItatc or foreign I'oInItIere political propagandafor or in the in at"Iuch foreign principal (it in the I print or tii)in any other Iorm wh reIIIoItIthly adaptedto heittg. or whi hI‘IieI'eI will he. or which he ittlends diIII-Ittinated or circulated among t more persons IIIIIII. not later than eight hourI alter the beginning traItIItIittIII thereof. file with the All Generaltwo copiesthereofandat them. duly signed by or on the he I-uehagent.setting forth full informat - ID the places. tInIeI'. and extent 0 transmittal. ' I-ZIery.pI‘le within the United Stet i.I an agent of II foreign principal required to register under the PnWIh'" this Act and IIho transmitsor causes tmansmitted in the United States by any means or inI-trumentali interstite or foreign eommere THE ECSTASY OF COMMUNICATION y SEMIOTEXT(E)FOREIGNAGENTSSERIES Jim Fleming and Sylvére Lotringer, Editors IN THE SHADOW OF THE SILENT MAJORITIES Jean Baudrillard DRIFTWORKS Jean-Frangois Lyotard POPULAR DEFENSE AND ECOLOGICAL STRUGGLES Paul Virilio SIMULATIONS Jean Baudn’llard THE SOCIAL FACTORY Toni Negri & Mario Tronti PURE WAR Paul Virilio & Sylvére Lotringer FOUCAULT LIVE M ichel F oucault FORGET FOUCAULT J ean Baudrillard BEHOLD METATRON, THE RECORDING ANGEL Sol Yurick BOLO'BOLO P. M. SPEED AND POLITICS Paul Virilio ON THE LINE Gilles Deleuze & Félix Guattari SADNESS AT LEAVING Erje Ayden NOMADOLOGY: THE WAR MACHINE Gilles Deleuze & Félix Guattari REMARKSONMARX Michel Foucault 69 WAYS TO PLAY THE BLUES Jiirg Laederach COMMUNISTS LIKE US F élix Guattari & Toni Negri GERMANIA Heiner Miiller INTERVENTIONS Michel Foucault ASSASSINATION RHAPSODY Derek Pell THE ECSTASY OF COMMUNICATION Jean Baudrillard LOOKING BACK ON THE END OF THE WORLD Dietmar Kamper & ChristOph Wulf THE ECSTASY OF CHMMUNICATIN Jean laudrillard Translatedby Bernard& CarolineSchutze Editedby SylvéreLotringer SEMIOTEXT(E) FOREIGN AGENTS SERIES Originally published 1987 as L'Autre par lui-méme EditionsGalilee,Paris. Copyright @1987Editions Galilee Translation @1988 Semiotext(e), Bernard Schutze and Caroline Schutze. Semiotext(e) 522 Philosophy Hall Columbia University New York, N Y 10027 USA Semiotext(e) and its Foreign Agents Series arepublished by Autonomedia 55 South 11thStreet Brooklyn, New York 11211-0568USA (718) 387-6471 Special thanks to Jim Fleming, Sue Ann Harkey, Lewanne Jones, Paul Krochmal, Christopher Mays, Mike Saenz, Lincoln Schlensky, and Bernard and Caroline Schutze. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction .................................................................... 9 The Ecstasyof Communication................................... 11 Rituals 0f Transparency............................................... 29 Metamorphosis, Metaphor, Metastasis......................... 45 Seduction, or, The Superficial Depths ......................... 57 From the SystemTo the Destiny of Objects................ 77 Why Theory?................................................................ 97 Conclusion.................................................................. 103 Notes ........................................................................... 105 THE ECSTASY OF COMMUNICATION INTRODUCTION It is paradoxical to make a retrospective survey of a work which never intended to be prospective.* It recalls the fate of Orpheus, who looked back on Eurydice too soon, and thereby condemned her to the underworld forever. One must pretend that the work pre- existed to itself and forebode its own end from the very beginning. This may be an ill omen. Yet this is an exercise in simulation which may be resonant with one of the principal themes of the whole: to pretend that this work were ac- complished, that it developed in a coherent *This volume, nrst published in Paris in 1987 under the title L’Autre par lui-mé‘me, was meant to present Jean Baudrillard’s entire work for a doctoral degree at the Sorbonne. The French sub-title is “Habilz'tation.” [Editor’sNote] 9 10 Introduction manner and has always existed. Therefore I can only conceive of speaking of it in terms of simulation, much in the same manner that Borges reeonstitutesa lost civilization through the fragments of a library. In other words, I can hardly examine the question of socio- logical verisimilitude, to which, moreover, I could only answer with the greatest of difnculty; rather I must put myself in the place of an imaginary traveler who stumbles upon these writings as upon a lost manuscript and who, for lack of supporting evidence, would attempt to reconstitute the society they de- scribe. THE ECSTASY OF COMMUNICATION Everything began with objects, yet there is no longer a system of objects. The eri- tique of objects was based on signs saturated with meaning, along with their phantasies and unconscious logic as well as their prestigious differential logic. Behind this dual logic lies the anthropological dream: the dream of the object as existing beyond and above exchange and use, above and beyond equivalence; the dream of a sacrificial logic, of gift, expen- diture, potlatch, “devil’s share” consumption, symbolicexchange.1 All this still exists, and simultaneously it is disappearing. The description of this pro- jective imaginary and symbolic universe was still the one of the object as the mirror of the 11 12 The Ecstasy of Communication subject. The opposition of the subject and the object was still signincant, as was the profound imaginary of the minor and the scene.2 The scene of history as well as the scene of the everyday emerge in the shadow of history as it is progressively divested of politics. Today the scene and the mirror have given way to a screen and a network. There is no longer any transcendenceor depth, but only the immanent surface of operations unfolding, the smooth and functional surface of communication. In the image of televison, the most beautiful pro- totypical object of this new era, the surround- ing universe and our very bodies are becoming monitoring screens. We no longer invest our objects with the same emotions, the same dreams of posses- sion, loss, mourning, jealousy; the psychologi- cal dimension has been blurred, even if one can still retrieve it in the particular. Barthes already foresaw this for the car, where the logic of possession, from the projec- tion inherent in strong subjective relation is substituted by a logic of dn'ving. No more power, speed, appropriation phantasies linked The Ecstasy of Cammunication 13 to the object itself, but a potentialtactic linked to its use ——mastery, control and command, Optimization of the game of possiblitities, which the automobile offers as a vector, and no longer as a psychological sanctuary ——result- ing in the transformation of the subject himself into a dn'ving computer, instead of the demi- urge drunk with power. The vehicle thus be— comes a bubble, the dashboard a console, and the landscape all around unfolds as a television screen. However, one can conceive of a subse- quent stage to this one, where the car is still a performative instrument, the stage at which it becomes an informing network. That is, the car which speaks to you, which informs you spontaneously of its general state and yours (eventually refusing to function if you are not functioning well), the advising, the deliberating car, a partner in a general negotiation on life- styles; something (or someone, since at this stage there is no more difference) to which you are wired, the communication with the car becoming the fundamental stake, a perpetual test of the presence of the subject vis-d—vishis 14 The Ecstasy of Communication objects ——an uninterrupted interface. From here on neither speed nor travel- ing ——not even the unconscious projection, competition, or prestige ——count any longer. In fact the desacralization of the car has been going on for some time now in the sense that “Speed is out! Drive more and consume less.” A kind of ecological ideal is taking over, an ideal of regulation, of moderate functionality, of solidarity between all the elements of one and the same system, of the control and global management of the whole. Each system (including the domestic universe) forms a kind of ecological niche, with a relational decor where all terms must remain in perpetual con- tact with one another, informed as to their re- spective strategies and that of the entire system because the failure of one term could lead to catastrophe. Although this is no doubt only a dis- course, one must take note that the analysis of consumption in the sixties and seventies origi- nated in the advertising discourse or in the pseudo—conceptualdiscourseof professionals.3 “Consumption,” the “strategy of desire” were The Ecstasy 0f COmmunication 15 at first only a metadiscourse, the analysis of a projective myth whose real consequenceswere generally unknown.4 Actually no more was known about the relation of people to their objects than about the reality of primitive societies. This is what allows one to build the myth, but it is also the reason why it is useless to try and objectively verify these hypotheses through statistics. As we know, the discourse of advertisersis for the use of professionalsin the field, and who could say that the present discourse on computer science is not accessible strictly to professionals in computer science and communication (the discourse of intellec- tuals and sociologists, for that matter, raises the samequestion). Private telematics: each individual sees himself promoted to the controls of a hypothet- ical machine, isolated in a position of perfect sovereignty, at an infinite distance from his original universe;that is to say, in the same position as the astronaut in his bubble, existing in a state of weightlessness which compels the individual to remain in perpetual orbital night and to maintain sufncient speedin zero gravity 16 The Ecstasy of Communication to avoid crashing into his planet of origin. The realization of the orbital satellite in the universe of the everyday corresponds to the elevation of the domestic universe to the celes- tial metaphor, with the orbiting 0f the two- room/kitchen/bathroom unit in the last lunar model; hence to the satellisation of the real itself. The everydayness of the terrestial habi- tat hypostatized in space marks the end of metaphysics, and signals the beginning of the era of hyperreality: that which was previously mentally projected, which was lived as a meta- phor in the terrestial habitat is from now on projected, entirely without metaphor, into the absolute spaceof simulation. Our private sphere has ceasedto be the stage where the drama of the subject at odds with his objects and with his image is played out: we no longer exist asplaywrights 0r actors but as terminals of multiple networks. Tele- vision is the most direct prefiguration of this, and yet today one’s private living spaceis con- ceived of as a receiving and operating area, as a monitoring screen endowed with telematic power, that is to say, with the capacity to regu- The Ecstasy of Communication 17 late everything by remote control. Including the work process, within the prospects of tele— matic work performed at home, as well as con- sumption, play, social relations, leisure. One could conceive of simulating leisure or vaca— tion situations in the same way that night is simulated for pilots. Is this science fiction? Yes, but up un- til now all environmental mutations derived from an irreversible tendency towards a formal abstraction of elements and functions, to their homogenization into a single process, as well as to the displacement of gestural behaviors: of bodies, of efforts, in electric or electronic com— mands, t0 the miniaturization in time and space. These are processes where the stage (which is no longer a stage) becomes that of the infinitesimal memory and the screen. This is our problem, insofar as this electronic encephalization, this miniaturization of circuits and of energy, this transistorization 0f the environment condemn t0 futility, t0 obsolescence and almost to obscenity, all that which once constituted the stage of our lives. We know that the simple presenceof television 18 The Ecstasy of Communication transforms our habitat into a kind of archaic, closed-off cell, into a vestige of human rela- tions whose survival is highly questionable. From the moment that the actors and their phantasies have ceasedto haunt this stage, as soon as behavior is focused on certain operational screens 0r terminals, the rest ap- pears only as some vast useless body, which hasbeenbothabandonedandcondemned:The real itself appearsas a large, futile, body. The era of miniaturization, of remote control, and of a micrOprocessingof time, bod- ies, and pleasure has come. There is no longer an ideal principle of these things on a human scale. All that remains are miniaturized, con- centrated and immediately available effects. This change of scale is discernable every- where: the human body, our body, seemssup- ernuous in its proper expanse,in the complex- ity and multiplicity of its organs, of its tissue and functions, becausetoday everything is con- centrated in the brain and the genetic code, which alone sum up the operational definition of being. The landscape, the immense geo- graphical landscape seemsa vast, barren body The Ecstasy of Communication 19 whose very expanse is unnecessary (even off the highway it is boring to cross), from the moment that all events are concentrated in the cities, which are also being reduced to several extemely miniaturized high places. And what about time, this vast leisure time we are left with, and which engulfs us like an empty ter- rain; an expanserendered futile in its unfolding from the moment that the instantaneousnessof communication miniaturizes our exchanges in- to a seriesof instants? The body as a stage, the landscape as a stage, and time as a stageare slowly disappear- ing. The same holds true for the public space: the theatre of the social and of politics are pro- gressively being reduced to a shapeless,multi- headed body. Advertising in its new version is no longer the baroque, utOpian scenario ec- static over objects and consumption, but rather the effect of the omnipresent visibility of cor- porations, trade marks, PR men, social dia- logue and the virtues of communication. With the disappearanceof the public place, advertis- ing invades everything (the street, the mon- ument, the market, the stage, language). It 20 The Ecstasy of Communication determines architecture and the creation of super-objects such as Beaubourg, Les Halles or La Villette5 ——which are literally advertising monuments (0r anti-monuments) — not so much because they are centered on consump- tion, but because from the outset these mon- uments were meant to be a demonstration of the operation of culture, of the cultural operation of the commodity and that of the masses in movement. Today our only archi- tecture is just that: huge screens upon which moving atoms, particles and molecules are refracted. The public stage, the public place have been replaced by a gigantic circulation, ventilation, and ephemeral connecting space. The private space undergoes the same fate. Its disappearanceparallels the diminish- ing of the public space.Both have ceasedto be either spectacle or secret. The distinction be- tween an interior and an exterior, which was just what characterized the domestic stage of objects and that of a symbolic spaceof the ob— ject has been blurred in a double obscenity. The most intimate operation of your life be- comes the potential grazing ground of the me- The Ecstasy of Cammunication 21 dia (non—stOptelevision on the Louds family in the USA,6endless“slice of life” and“psy” shows on French TV). The entire universe also unfolds unnecessarily on your home screen. This is a microscopic pornography, pomogra— phic becauseit is forced, exaggerated,just like the close-up of sexual acts in a porno film. All this destroys the stage, once preserved through a minimal distance and which was based on a secretritual known only to its actors. The private universe was certainly ali- enating, insofar as it separatedone from others, from the world in which it acted as a protective enclosure, as an imaginary protector. Yet it also contained the symbolic benefit of alienation (the fact that the other exists) and that otherness can be played out for better or for worse. Thus the consumer society was lived under the sign of alienation; it was a society of spectacle — but at least there was spectacle, and the spectacle, even if alienated, is never obscene.7Obscenity begins when there is no more spectacle, no more stage, no more theatre, no more illusion, when every-thing becomes immediately transparent, visible, 22 The Ecstasy of Communication exposed in the raw and inexorable light of information and communication. We no longer partake of the drama of alienation, but are in the ecstasy of communi- cation. And this ecstasy is obscene. Obscene is that which eliminates the gaze, the image and every representation. Obscenity is not confined to sexuality, becausetoday there is a pornography of information and communica- tion, a pornographyof circuits and networks, of functions and objects in their legibility, availability, regulation, forced signincation, capacity to perform, connection, polyvalence, their free expression... It is no longer the obscenity of the hid- den, the repressed, the obscure, but that of the visible, the all-too—visible, the more-visible-~ than-visible; it is the obscenity of that which no longer contains a secret and is entirely soluble in information and communication. Marx already denounced the obscenity 0f the commodity, which is linked to the prin- ciple of its equivalence,to the abject principle of free circulation. The obscenity 0f the com- modity derives from the fact that it is abstract, The Ecstasy of Communication 23 formal and light in comparison with the weight, opacity and substance of the object. The commodity is legible, as opposed to the object, which never quite reveals its secret, and it manifests its visible essence——its price. It is the locus of transcription of all possible ob- ‘1 jects: throughit, objectscommunicate——the merchantform is the first greatmediumof the i" modernworld. But the messagewhich the 2 objects deliver is radically simplined and is always the same——their exchange value. And so, deep down the messagehas already ceased to exist, it is the medium which imposes itself in its pure circulation. Let us call this ecstasy: the market is an ecstatic form of the circulation of goods, as prostitution and pornography are ecstatic forms of the circulation of sex. One need only carry this analysis to its full potential to grasp what has happened to transparence and the obscenity of the universe of communication, which have long surpassed the Obscenities still relative to the universe of the commodity. Ecstasy is all functions abolished into one dimension, the dimension of communica- 24 The Ecstasy of Communication tion. All events, all spaces, all memories are abolished in the sole dimension of information: this is obscene. Hot, sexual obscenity is followed by cool communicational obscenity. The former implied a form of promiscuity, a clutter of ob- jects accumulated in the private universe, or everything that remains unspoken and teeming in the silence of repression. However, this promiscuity is organic, Visceral, carnal; while the promiscuity which reigns over the commu- nication networks is one of a superficial satur- ation, an endless harassment, an extermination of interstitial space. When I pick up my tele- phone the marginal network hooks me up and keeps harping at me with the unbearable good will of that which seeksand claims to commu- nicate. Deregulated radio speaks, sings, ex- pressesitself.8 All very well, but in termsof the medium the result is a space——that of the FM frequency — which is saturated with over- lapping stations, so that what was once free by virtue of there having been space is no longer so. The word is free, but I am not; the spaceis so saturated, the pressure of all which wants to The Ecstasy of Communication 25 be heard so strong that I am no longer capable of knowing what I want. I plunge into the neg- ative ecstasyof radio. There is a state particular to fascination and giddiness. It is a singular form of pleasure, perhaps, but it is aleatory and dizzying. If one goes along with Roger Caillois’ classincaton of games -— mimicking, ago‘n, alea, ilinx: games of expression, games of competition, games of chance, games of giddiness9 ——then the movement of our entire culture will lead from a disappearance of the forms of expres- sion and competition towards an extension of the forms of chance (alea) and giddiness. These no longer imply any game of the scene, the mirror, challenge or otherness; they are rather, ecstatic, solitary, and narcissistic. Pleasure is no longer that of the scenic or aes- thetic manifestation (seductio) but that of pure fascination, aleatory and psychotropic (subduc- tio). This does not necessarily imply a nega- tive judgement, since the forms of pleasure and perception undoubtedly undergo a profound and original mutation. We can hardly assess the consequencesof such a transformation. In 26 The Ecstasy of Communication applying our old criteria and the renexes of a “scenic” sensibility, we run the risk of mis- construing the irruption of this new ecstatic and obsceneform in our sensorial sphere. One thing is for certain: if the scenese- duced us, the obscene fascinates us. However, ecstacy is the opposite of passion. Desire, pas- sion, seduction, 0r again, according to Caillois, expression and competition, are the games of thehotuniverse.Ecstasy,fascination,obsceni- ty (Caillois’ chance and giddiness), are games of the cold and cool universe (even giddiness is cold, especially the giddiness of drugs). In any case we will suffer from this forced extraversion of all interiority, from this forced introjection of all exteriority which is implied by the categorical imperative of com- munication. Perhaps in this case one should apply metaphors drawn from pathology. If “hyste' was the pathologyof the exacerbated staging of the subject — of the theatrical and ,, operational conversion of the body ——-and if a}paranoia was the pathology of organization —— dnné’structuringof a rigid andjealousworld — then today we have entered into a new form The Ecstasy of Cammunication 27 of schizophrenia — with the emergence of an immanent promiscuity and the perpetual in- terconnection of all information and communi- cation networks. No more hysteria, or projec- tive paranoia as such, but a state of terror which is characteristic of the schizophrenic, an over-proximity of all things, a foul promiscuity of all things which beleaguer and penetrate him, meeting with no resistance, and no halo, no aura, not even the aura of his own body protects him. In spite of himself the schizo- phrenic is open to everything and lives in the most extreme confusion. He is the obscene victim of the world’s obscenity. The schizo- phrenic is not, as generally claimed, char- acterized by his loss of touch with reality, but by the absolute proximity to and total instanta- neousnesswith things, this overexposure to the transparency of the world. Stripped of a stage and crossed over without the least obstacle, the schizophrenic cannot produce the limits of his very being, he can no longer produce himself as a mirror. He becomes a pure screen, a pure absorption and resorption surface of the influ- ent networks. RITUALS OF TRANSPARENCY The uncertainty of existing, and con- sequently the obsession of proving our exis- tence, prevail over desire that is strictly sexual. If sexuality is putting our identity on the line (down to the fact of having children) then we are really no longer in a position to devote ourselves to this task, for we are too preoccu- pied with saving our identity to undertake anything else. What matters above everything else is proving our existence, even if that is its only meaning. This can be seenin the recent grantti in New York or Rio. The preceeding generation said: “I exist, my name is So and So, I live in New York.” These signs were pregnant with meaning, which even if almost allegorical was 29 30 Rituals 0f Transparency that of the name. The recent grafitti is purely graphic and undecipherable. Implieitly it still says: “I exist,” yet, simultaneously, “1 have no name, I have no meaning, I have nothing to say.” The need to speak, even if one has nothing to say, becomes more pressing when one has nothing to say, just as the will to live becomes more urgent when life has lost its meaning. As a result, sexuality is relegated to a position of secondary importance, *to an already luxurious form of transcendance,of a ; waste of existence,while the absoluteurgency is simply to verify this existence. " I recall a particular scene of a hyperre- alist exhibition at Beaubourg, of flesh-colored, absolutely realistic and naked sculptures, or rather mannequins in unequivocal, banal positions. The instantaneousness of a body which is meaningless and which has nothing to say but simply exists, has a kind of stupefying effect upon its spectators. The reaction of the peOple was interesting. They leaned over to see something, to look at the texture of the skin, the pubic hair, everything, but there was nothing to see. Some even wanted to touch the Rituals 0f Transparency 31 bodies to test their reality, but of course that didn’t work because everything was already there. The exhibition did not even fool the eye. When one has been visually deceived one takes pleasure in guessing, and even if there is no intent to deceive, to fool, the aesthetic and tac- tile pleasure produced by certain forms in- volves a kind of divination. All that remains here is the extraordin- ary technique by which the artist erasesall the signals of divination. Not even a trace of illu- sion remains underneath the veracity of the hair. Precisely becausethere is nothing to see, people approach, lean over and nair out this hallucinating hyper-resemblance, haunting in its friendliness. They lean over to see an as- tounding thing: an image where there is no- thing to see. Obscenity lies in the fact that there is nothing to see. It is not a sexual obscenity, but the obscenity of the real. The specator does not lean over out of sexual curiosity, but to check the texture of the skin, the innnite text- ure of the real. Perhaps our true sexual act consists in this: in verifying t0 the point of 32 Rituals of Transparency giddiness the useless objectivity of things. Often our erotic and pornographic im- agery, this array of breasts, assesand genitalia has no other meaning but to expressthe useless objectivity of things. Nudity is but a desperate attempt to emphasize the existence of some- thing. The genitalia is but a special effect. Sexuality is but a ritual of transparency. Where once it had to be hidden, sexuality to- day hides what little remains of reality, and, of course, participates in all of this disembodied passion. Where does this fascination come from? Certainly not from seduction (seduction always challenges this pornography, this use- less objectivity of things). In truth we never really look at these images. Looking implies that the object viewed covers and uncovers itself, that it disappears at every instant, for looking involves a kind of oscillation. These images, however, are not caught in a game of emergence and disappearance. The body is al- ready there without even the faintest glimmer of a possible absence, in the state of radical disillusion; the state of pure presence. In an Rituals 0f Transparency 33 image certain parts are visible, while others are not; visible parts render the others invisible, and a rhythm of emergence and secrecy setsin, a kind of water mark of the imaginary. While here everything is of equal visibility, every- thing shares the same shallow space (Octavio Paz’s aesthetic of disembodiment). Fascina- tion is this disembodied passion of a gaze with- out an object, of a gaze without an image. Our media spectacles long ago crossed the thresh- hold of stupefaction. It is that of a vitrified exacerbation of the body, of a vitrified exacer- bation of genitalia, of an empty scene where nothing takes place and which nonetheless fills our vision. It is also that of information or of the political in which nothing takes place and by which we are nonethelesssaturated. Do we desire this fascination? Do we desire this pornographic objectivity of the world? How‘can we know? There is without doubt a collective giddiness of escape into the obscenity of a pure and empty form, character- ized simultaneously by the excessiveness of sex and its disqualification, as well as by the excessiveness and degradation of the visible. 34 Rituals 0f Transparency This fascination also concerns modern art, whose objective is quite literally to no longer offer itself to the gaze, to defy all seduction of the gaze. Modern art exerts only the magic of its disappearance. However, this obscenity and this indif- ference do not necessarily lead to a dead point. They may again become collective values, as one can seein the rebuilding of the new rituals surroundingthem;the rituals of transparency. We undoubtedly put on the act of obscenity and of pornography, just as others play the game of ideology and of bureaucracy (this is collectively true for the Eastern bloc), or like Italian society puts on the act of confusion and terrorism. Female strip teaseputs on an act in publicity (note the naiveté of the feminist in- dictment of this “prostitution”). This is an- other ritual of transparency. Sexual liberation, omnipresent pornography, information, participation,free expression — if all this were true it would be unbearable. If all this were true we would really be living in obscenity, in the nakedtruth, in the insanepretensionofall things to express their truth. Fortunately the Rituals 0f Transparency 35 destiny of things protects us, for at their cul- mination, as they are about to verify their exis- tence, they always undo themselves and thereby plunge back into the secret. No one can say if sex has been liber- ated or not, or whether the rate of sexual pleas- ure has increased. In sexuality, as in art, the idea of progress is absurd. However, obscenity and transparency progress ineluctably, because they no longer partake in the order of desire but in the order of the frenzy of the image. The solicitation of and voraciousness for im- ages is increasing at an excessive rate. Images have become our true sex object, the object of our desire. The obscenity of our culture re- sides in the confusion of desire and its equiva- lent materialized in the image; not only for sexual desire, but in the desire for knowledge and its equivalent materialized in “informa- tion,” the desire for fantasy and its equivalent materialized in the Disneylands of the world, the desire for space and its equivalent pro- grammed into vacation itineraries, the desire for play and its equivalent programmed into private telematics. It is this promiscuity and 36 Rituals 0f Transparency the ubiquity of images, this viral contamination of things by images, which are the fatal char- acteristics of our culture. And this knows no bounds, because unlike sexed animal species protected by a kind of internal regulatory sys- tem, images cannot be prevented from prolif- erating indennitely, since they do not breed organically and know neither sex nor death. And it is for this reason that they obsess us in this period of recession of sexuality and death: through images we dream of the immortality of protozoa, infinitely multiplying through contiguity in an asexual chain of progression. In the rituals of transparence one must include the entire prosthetic and protective en- vironments as substitutes for the natural bio- logical defensesof the human body. We are all bubble-children, like the boy who died re- cently in the United States. He lived in his bubble, inside the medical surroundings of the NASA space suit, protected from all infection by the artificially immunized space; his mother caressed him through the glass with rubber gloves, as he laughed and grew up in his extra- Rituals 0f Transparency 37 terrestrial atmosphere under the observation of science (he is the experimental brother of the wolf—child,the savagechild adopted by wolves ——today computers take care of the disabled Child). This bubble-child is the prenguration 0f the future, of total asepsis,the elimination of all germs, which are the biological form of transparency. He is the symbol of existence in a vacuum, until new exclusive to bacteria and particles in laboratories, but which will in- creasingly become ours: that is, to be pressed in a vacuum like records, preserved under vacuum like frozen foods, dying in a vacuum like the victims of unrelenting therapy. We will be thinking and renecting in a vacuum, as illustrated everywhere by artincial intelligence. The increasing cerebral capacities of machines would normally lead to a techno- logical purification of the body. The human body will be able to rely less and less on its antibodies, and will have to be protected from the exterior. The artificial purification of all milieus, atmospheres, and environments will supplant the failing internal immune systems. If these immune systems are breaking down it 38 Rituals of Transparency is becausean irreversible tendency called prog- ress pushes the human body and spirit into re— linquishing its systems of defense and self- determination, only to replace them with tech- nical artifacts. Divested of his defenses, man becomes eminently vulnerable to science. Di- vested of his phantasies, he becomes eminently vulnerable to psychology. Freed of his germs, he becomeseminently vulnerable to medicine. It would not be too far-fetched to say that the extermination of mankind begins with the extermination of germs. Man, with his humors, his passions, his laugh, his genitalia, his secretions, is really nothing more than a filthy little germ disturbing the universe of transparency. Once everything will have been cleansed, once an end will have been put to all viral processes and to all social and bacilliary contamination,then only the virus of sadness will remain, in this universeof deadly Cleanli- ' nessand sophistication. Since thought is in its way a kind of network of antibodies and a natural immunity system, it too is severely threatened. Thought will be favorably replaced by a better system, a Rituals 0f Transparency 39 cerebro-Spinal bubble, freed of all animal and metaphysical renexes. Our very brain, our 1 verybodieshavebecomethisbubble,thissani- ‘ tized sphere, a transparent envelope in which we seek refuge, as destitute and overprotected " as the unknown child condemnedto artificial immunity and perpetual transfusions, con- demned to die as soon as he will have kissed his mother. To eachhis ownwbubbleithat is the law,.p.-. - ’d-xfd—n . today. Just as we have reached the limits of geographic space and have explored all the confines of the planet, we can only implode into a Spacewhich is reduced daily as a result of our increasing mobility made possible by airplanes and the media, to the point where all trips have already taken place; where the vaguest desire for dispersion, evasion and movement are concentratedin a nxed point, in an immobility that has ceasedto be one of non- movement and has become that of a potential ubiquity, of an absolute mobility, which voids its own space by crossing it ceaselessly and without effort. Thus transparency explodes into a thousand pieces, which are like the shat- 40 Rituals 0f Transparency tered fragments of a mirror, where we catch a last glimpse of our image furtively renected before it disappears. Like the fragments of a hologram, each piece contains the entire universe. It is also characteristic of the fractal object to be contained entirely in its minutest details. In this senseone can speakof thefrac- tal subject, which — instead of transcending into a finality beyond itself ——is diffracted into a multitude of identical minaturized egos, mul- tiplying in an embryonic mode as in a bio- logical culture, and completely saturating its environment through an infinite process of scissiparity.10While the fractal object is identi- cal to each of its elementary components, the fractal subject dreamsonly of resembling him- self in each one of his fractions. That is to say, his dream involutes below all representation towards the smallest molecular fraction of him- self; a strange Narcissus, no longer dreaming ‘ of his ideal image,but of a formulato geneti- cally reproduce himself into innnity. Formerly we were haunted by the fear of resembling others, of losing ourselves in a crowd: afraid of conformitv. and obsessedwith Rituals 0f Transparency 41 difference. Today, we need a solution to de— liver us from resembling others. All that mat- ters now is only to resemble oneself, to find oneself everywhere, multiplied but loyal to one’s personal formula; to see the same credit listings everywhere, be on all movie screensat once. Resemblance is no longer concerned with others, but rather with the individual in his vague resemblance to himself; a resemb- lance born of the individual’s reduction to his simple elements. As a result, difference takes on another meaning. It is no longer the differ- ence between one subject and another, but an internal, infinite differentiating of the same. Fatality today is of the order of an interior gid- diness, of an explosion of the identical, of the “narcissistic” faithfulness to one’s own sign and to one’s own formula. One is alienated from oneself, from one’s multiple clones, from all these little isomorphic “1”s... Once each individual is contained in one hyperpotential point, the others have virtu- ally ceasedto exist. It is impossible to imagine this, just as it is futile to imagine space if one can cross it in an instant. Picturing the austral 42 Rituals 0f Transparency territories and everything separating you from them is futile from the moment that the airplane can take you there in twenty hours. Picturing others and everything which brings you closer to them is futile from the instant that “communication” can make their presence im- mediate. Imagining time in its length and complexity is futile from the moment that any project is amenable to its immediate execution. For a primitive or a peasant, imagining that something could exist beyond his native space was impossible; they had never even had a pre- monition that something other could exist; this horizon was thus mentally impassable. If im- agining is impossible today, it is for the reverse reason: all the horizons have already beentrav- ersed, you have already confronted all the else- wheres, and all that remains is for you to becomeecstatic over (in the literal senseof the word), or to withdraw from, this inhuman ex- trapolation. This withdrawal, which we know well, is that of the subject for whom the sexual and social horizons of others has disappeared, and whose mental horizon has been reduced to the Rituals 0f Transparency 43 manipulation of his images and screens. He has everything he needs. Why should he worry about sex and desire? It is through the net- works that this loss of affection for oneself and for others has come about, and it is contempo- rary with the desert-like form of space engen- dered by speed, the desert-like form of the social engendered by communication and in- formation.11 There is a fractal demultiplication of the body (of sex, object, desire); seen from up close, all bodies, all faces look alike. The close-up of a face is as obscene as a sexual or- gan seen from up Close. It is a sexual organ. The promiscuity of the detail, the zoom—in, takes on a sexual value. The exorbitance of the details attracts us, in addition to the raminca- tion, the serial multiplication of each detail. The extreme opposite of seduction is the ex- treme promiscuity of pornography, which de- composesbodies into their slightest detail, ges- tures into their minutest movements. Our de- sire reaches out to these new kinetic, numeric, “h fractal, artincial and synthetic images, because } they are of the lowest definition. One could al- w 44 Rituals 0f '1'ransparency most say that through a technical excess of good will they are asexual, like porn images. However, we don’t look for definition or rich- ness of imagination in these images; we look for the giddiness of their superficiality, for the artince of the detail, the intimacy of their tech- nique. What we truly desire is their technical artinciality, and nothing more. The same is true for sex. We exalt the detailof sexualactsason a screenor undera microscope, or as a chemical or biological op- eration. We are looking for a reduction into partial objects and the fulfillment of desire in the technical s0phistieation 0f the body. In itself changed by sexual liberation, the body has been reduced to a division of surfaces, a proliferation of multiple objects wherein its finitude, its desirable representation, its seduc- tion are lost. It is a metastatic body, a fractal body which can no longer hope for resurrec- t10n. t” l METAMORPHOSES METAPHORS METASTASES Where has the body of the fable gone? The body of metamorphosis, the one of a pure chain of appearances,of a timeless and sexless nuidity of forms, the ceremonial body brought to life by mythology, or the Peking Opera and Oriental theatre, as well as by dance: a non- individual body, a dual and nuid body — body without desire, yet capable of all metamorpho- ses —- a body freed from the mirror of itself, yet given over to all seduction? And what se- duction is more violent than the one of chang- ing species, to transfigure oneself into the ani- mal, the vegetable, the mineral or even the 45 46 Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases inanimate? This movement makes us traitors to our own species, and exposes us to the gid- diness of all other species. This is the model of amorous seduction, which also pursues the strangenessof the other sex, and the possibility of being initiated into it as into a different an- imal or vegetable species. The power of metamorphosis is at the 9 root of all seduction, including the most shift- . ing forms of substitution: those of faces, roles and masks. It is with a metamorphosis that we shroud every seduction; it is with a ceremonial that we shroud every metamorphosis. This is the law of appearances, and the body is the first object caught in this game. The body of metamorphosis knows neither metaphor nor the operation of meaning. Meaning does not slip from one form to the other, it is the forms which slip directly from one to the other, as in dance movements or in oracular prophecies. Not a psychological body, not a sexual body, a body freed from all sub- jectivity, a body recovering the animal felinity of the pure object, of pure movement, of a pure gestural transparition. Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases 47 Indeed, it must pay for this fabulous capacity by renouncing desire, sex and repro— duction. But this is a means for it not to die. For passing from one species to another, from one form to another is a means of disappearing, not of dying. To disappear is to disperse one- self in appearances. And dying doesn’t do any good; one must still know how to disappear. Living doesn’t do any good; one must still se- duce. The body of metamorphosis knows no symbolic order, it knows only a vertiginous succession where the subject loses itself in ?\ritual sequences. Nor does seduction know ”any symbolic order. It is only when this trans— figuration of forms from one into the other comes to a halt that a symbolic order appears, that meaning is metaphorized according to the law. Once the Great Game of the Fable, of Giddiness and of Metamorphosis has come to pass, and sexuality and desire have appeared, then only does the body become metaphor, a metaphorie scene of the sexual reality, with its procession of desires and repressions. 48 Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases There is already an extraordinary de- generation in this: instead of being the sump- tuous theatre of multiple initiatory forms, of the cruelty and versatility of appearances,the locus of a phantasmagoria of species, sexes and of the diverse means of dying, the body is now but the exhibitor of a single make among all others: sexual difference and the sceneof a single scenario, the unconscious sexual phan- tasmatic. It is no longer the fabulous surface of the inscription of dreams and divinities, it is now only the stage of phantasies and the meta- phor of the subject. The ceremonial body can- not be made intelligble to a truth, be it meta- phorical, of sexuality and the unconscious. (The limits of psychoanalysis lie herein: it has not paid heedto the Fable, while still claiming to make reference to it, and remains incapable of saying anything about this being of meta- morphosis, vertiginous and nonethelessdevoid of desire.) The forms play with one another, ex- changing one another without passing through the psychological imaginary of a subject.There the world is world; language is only one of its Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases 49 possible forms. The imaginary, our imaginary, is but the psychological vestige of the cruel prestige of forms and appearances. The imag— inary is the diminished form of the genie’s illu- sion and the reign of metamorphoses. Psychological body, repressed body, neurotic body, space of phantasy, minor of otherness, mirror of identity, the locus of the subject prey to its own image and desire: our body is no longer pagan and mythic but Chris- tian and metaphorical ——body of desire and not of the fable. We have put it through a kind of materialist precipitation. The way in which we interpret our body today, instead of the divination derived from dance, the duel and stellar planets, the way in which we recount it in our unrecognized simulacrum of reality, as an individuated space of pulsion, of desire and phantasies, has led it to become the materialist precipitation of a seducing form, which carried within it a gigantic power of negation over the world, an ultra-mundane power of illusion and metamorphosis... After the bodies of metamorphosis and metaphor follows the body of metastasis. 50 Metamorphoses, Metaphor, Metastases The metaphorwasstill a figure of exile, the soul’s presence in relation to the body, de- sire in relation to its object, meaning in relation to language. But in exile one can always main- tain a comfortable distance, a pathetic, dram- atic, critical, aesthetic distance ——the orphan- like serenity of one’s own world, this is the ideal figure of the territory. Deterriton'aliza- tion is no longer exile at all, and it is no more a metaphoric figure, it is a figure of metastasis; a deprivation of meaning and territory, lobotomy of the body resulting from the turmoil of the circuits.12 Electrocuted, lobotomized, the soul has become but a cerebral convolution. More- over, it is probable that our learned neurolo- gists will be able to locate the soul in the brain, just as they have located the linguistic function and the upright posture. Will it be found in the left or the right hemisphere? The religious, metaphysical or philo- sophical definition of being has given way to an operational dennition in terms of the gen- etic code (DNA) and cerebral organization (the informational code and billions of neurons). We are in a system where there is no more Metamorphoses, metaphors, metastases 5] soul, no more metaphor of the body ——the fable of the unconscious itself has lost most of its resonance. No narrative can come to meta- phorize our presence; no transcendencecan play a role in our dennition; our being is ex- hausting itself in molecular linkings and neuronic convolutions. This having been established,there are no more individuals, but only potential mu- tants. From a biological, genetic and cyber- netic point of view, we are all mutants. Now, for mutants there can no longer be any Last Judgement, or the resurrection of the body, for what body will one resurrect? It will have changed formula, chromosomes, it will have been programmed according to other motor and mental variables, it will no longer have any claim on its own image. In this sense a handicap opens up a veritable terrain of anticipation, an objective experimentation on the body, the senses,the brain, in particular in its relation with comput- ers; computers as a new, productive, immater- ial force, and the handicapasan anticipation of future work conditions in an altered, inhuman 52 Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases and abnormal universe. One must observe the blind playing a ball game ——torball, created specincally for them ——in which they display SF-like behavior, adjusting themselves to each other by ear and the animal renex, which will soon be the case for humans in a process of eyeless tactile perception and renex adaptation, evolving in the systems as in the interior of their brain or in the convolutions of a box. Such are the blind, and in general the handi- capped; mutant figures, because mutilated and. hence closer to commutation, closer to this telepathic, telecommunicational universe than we others: humans a11-too-human,condemned by our lack of disabilities to conventional forms of work. By the force of circumstance the dis- abled person is a potential expert in the motor and sensorial domain. And it is not by chance that the social is aligning itself more and more with the handicapped, and their operational advancement: they can become wonderful in- struments precisely because of their handicap. They may precedeus on the path towards mu- tation and dehumanization. Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases 53 In this cybernetic peripeteia of the body, passions have disappeared. Or rather, they have materialized. The “anxiety mole— cule” hasjust been discovered! Franeois Jacob writes that the pleasure center has been lo- cated, somewhere in the brain or in the spinal cord.13A miracle:it is immediatelyjuxtaposed with the center of displeasure. And Jacob goes on to say that “this would have pleased Freud” (meaning: becauseFreud stood nrm on the am- bivalence of pleasure and displeasure, it would have pleased him that the anatomical juxtapo- sition in a sense verified this thesis.) What marvellous naiveté. And where would one lo- cate masochism, in pleasure or diSpleasure? And besides, to remain within the confines of Freud’s logic: becausetheir psychic affinity is total, shouldn’t pleasure and displeasure, rather than being juxtaposed, be exchanged at a sin- gle point? Enough of these scientinc jests. What has become of seduction today, of passion, of this force which wrests the human being from all localization, from all objective definition; what has become of this fatality, or this superi- 54 Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases or irony of this evasive aSpiration, or this alter- native strategy? Has it passedinto the unconscious, into the repressed of psychoanalysis? If it still ex- ists today it can only haunt objective reality, haunt the truth itself as its perversion, its dis- tortion, its abnormality, its accident. Irony, if it exists, can only have passedinto things. It can only have found refuge in a disobedience to behavioral norms, in the failure of programs, in covert dysfunction, in the silence at the horizon of meaning, in the rule of the hidden game, in the secret. The sublime has passed into the subliminal. But does there still exist a subliminal aspect to things? Nothing could be less certain. Everything is exposed to transparency; that’s why there is no more transcendence,that’s also why neither repression nor transgression are any longer possible. One can no longer count on a revolution of the repressed (either psychic or historical). It is the immanence that every- thing is playing out. It is simply not certain if, in immanence, things will obey the objective laws which we are willing to grant them. Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases 55 Transcendence has drawn its last breath. All that remains is the tension of im- manence. What we must consider are the pro- digious effects which are the consequence of the loss of all transcendence. Once severed from transcendence,it is not true that the world is left to pure accident, to a random distribution of things obeying only the laws of probability ——this is the imaginary of a proud conscience which believes that things left unto themselves produce only their confusion. Yet immanence left to itself is not at all random. It deploys a connection of events or disconnection of events altogether unexpected, in particular this Singular form which combines connecting and disconnecting, that of the exponential. The escalating power “die steigernde Potenz” stands in opposition to the dialectical move- ment “die dialektische Aufhebung” which is the movement of transcendence. This Steig- erung is like a challenge offered by things, beings, and ourselves to the loss of references and their transcendence. Morevover one finds this connected/disconnected form in the mythic form of challenge and seduction, of which we 56 Metamorphoses, Metaphors, Metastases know that it is not a dialectical relation, but an escalating power expressed by a potentiali- zation of the stakes,and not at all by an equi- librium. In seduction we re-encounter this exponential form, this fatal quality whose des- tiny sometimeschancesupon us, as it does for things when they are left to their own devices. SEDUCTION, OR, THE SUPERFICIAL ABYSS Seduction is not a theme which stands in opposition to others or puts an end to others. Seductionis what seduces,and that’s that. To begin with, almost a pun: we are told that everythin g relies on production ——and if everything relied on seduction? A pun is always a challenge, and in the triumphant era of production the mere allusion to seduction also assumesthe role of a theoreti- cal challenge. Challenge, and not desire, lies at the heart of seduction. Challenge is that to which one cannot avoid responding, while one can choose not to respond to desire. Desire takes you beyond all contracts, beyond the law of exchange,beyond equivalences,in a bidding which may have no end. Far more than the 57 5 8 Seduction, or... pleasureprinciple, it is challengeand seduction which draw us beyond the reality principle. Seduction is not that which is opposed to production. It is that which seducesproduc- tion ——just as absenceis not that which is op-— posed to presence, but that which seducespre- sence, as evil is not that which is opposed to good, but seducesgood, as the feminine is not opposed to the masculine, but seducesthe mas- culine. One could conceive of a theory dealing with signs, terms, and values on the basis of their seductive attraction, and not in terms of their contrast or calculated Opposition. This theory would definitively shatter the specular- ity of the sign; a theory where everything would be played out not in terms of distinction or equivalence but in terms of a duel and rever- sibility. At last, a seductive theory of lan- guage". A theory in which there would be many instances of this seductive operation, of this lightning flash of seduction melting the polar circuits of meaning. Thus, in the ancient cos- mogony, the elements of water, earth, nre and air were not the distinctive elements of a sys- ...The Superficial Abyss 59 tem of classification, but attracting elements, seducing one another: water seduced by fire, fire seducing water. Seduction is the world’s elementary dy- namic. Gods and men were not separatedby the moral chasm of religion: they continuously played the game of mutual seduction; the sym- bolie equilibrium of the world is founded on these relations of seduction and playfulness. All this has changed significantly for us, at least in appearance. For what has happened to good and evil, to the true and the false, to all these great distinctions which we need to de- cipher and make senseof our world? All these terms, torn asunder at the cost of unbounded energy, are ready at any moment to extinguish one another, and collapse to our greatest joy. Seduction hurls them against one another, and unites them beyond meaning, in a paroxysm of intensity and charm. Distinctive signs, full signs, never se- duce us. Seduction only comes through emp- ty, illegible, insoluble, arbitrary, fortuitous signs, which glide by lightly, modifying the index of the refraction of space.They are signs 60 Seduction, or... without a subject of enunciation, nor an enouneed, they are pure signs in that they are neither discursive nor generate any exchange. The protagonistsof seduction are neither locu- tor nor interlocutee, they are in a dual and antagonistic situation. As such the signs of seduction do not signify; they are of the order of the ellipse, of the short circuit, of the nash of wit ([6 trait d’esprit). There has always been confusion be- tween the distinctive sign and the discursive sign, the one of linguistics, and the other sign, the mark ([6 trait). Linguistics has always (for- tunately) failed to grasp what seduces us in a poem, a story, a wittieism. (Saussure sensed this in the “Anagrammes”. But precisely be- cause he was an anagrammatician at the time, and not a linguist or semiotician, he forebode the immanent reversibility of the sign, which in poetry causeslanguage to consume itself in its detour.)14 Psychoanalysis has also failed to ex- plain the seductive nature proper to neurosis, to dreams, to slips of the tongue, to madness it- self, precisely because seduction is not of the ...The Superficial Abyss 61 order of the phantasy, of repression, nor of de- sire. Psychoanalysis only seessymptoms ——it is the unhappy conscience of the sign. Thus in Jensen’s La Gradiva, which Freud studied and analyzed, the mark (trait) of seduction is the foot of this young girl, whose light gait stemmedfrom poising her foot per- pendicular to the ground. This sign functions as pure seduction, as pure sign, and to relegate it to childhood or to the repressed unconscious, in order to make it the mere medium of Har- old’s phantasies,would be a contradiction. The sign falls from seduction into interpretation, and as a result Harold also falls from the enchanted sphere of seduction into the sphere of the real and the matrimonial. Fine example of the disenchantment of interpretation, of the misappropriation, which it can carry out in the name of any discipline, be it psychoanalysis, ontheverymarkof seduction.15 The mark of seduction is more than a sign. Such is the gaze, whose force resides precisely in it not being an exchange, but a double moment, a double mark, immediate, un- decipherable. Seduction is only made possible 62 Seduction, or... through this giddiness of reversibility (also present in the anagram), which cancels all depth, all in—depthoperation of meaning: sup- erncial giddiness, superficial abyss. Surface and appearance, that is the space of seduction. Seduction as a mastering of the reign of appearancesopposespower as a mastering of the universe of meaning. We gladly take night from appearancesand watch over the depth of meaning. Such is the law: every being, every thing must jealously guard its meaning and dismiss appearancesas a mal- efaction. Seduction is damned (but that is not the least of its charms.) Under these circumstances only few things and at rare moments attain pure appear- ance, and only these are seductive. The entire strategy of seduction is to bring things to a state of pure appearance,to make them radiate and wear themselves out in the game of ap- pearances(but the game has its rule, and its possibly rigourous ritual). We are forced to “pro-duce” things, in the literal sense of the word, because things have fallen under the yoke of meaning,into the deepwherefrom they ...The Superficial Abyss 63 must be extracted, and made to reappear in the order of the visible. Consequently the secret loses its meaning, and only the visible has any value for us. And yet one can conceive of a world where it suffices to seduce things or to have them seduceone another. Everywhere one seeks to produce meaning, to make the world signify, to render it visible. We are not, however, in danger of lacking meaning; quite to the contrary, we are gorged with meaning and it is killing us. As more and more things have fallen into the abys of meaning, they have retained less and less of the charm of appearances. There is something secret in appear- ances, precisely because they do not readily lend themselves to interpretation. They remain insoluble, indecipherable. The reverse strategy of the entire modern movement is the “libera- tion” of meaning and the destruction of appear- ances. To be done with appearances is the essential occupation of revolutions. I am not expressing any reactionary nostalgia; I am merely seeking to regain a space for the secret, seduction being simply that which lets appear- 64 Seduction, 0r... ance circulate and move as a secret. What could be more seductive than the secret? I have already said this of challenge and the nash of wit; in fact, all these things combined are part of the constellation of se- duction. Just as seduction challenges the order of production, so the secret challenges the or- der of production, so the secret challenges the order of truth and knowledge. What is in question here is not a thing kept secret, for this only overstimulates the will to knowledge, and always appears in the semblance of a truth. Yet there is nothing se- ductive about truth. Only the secret is seduc- tive: the secret which circulates as the rule of the game, as an initiatory form, as a symbolic pact, which no code can resolve, no clue in- terpret. There is, for that matter, nothing hid- den and nothing to be revealed. It cannot be stressed enough: THERE IS NEVER ANY- THING TO PRO-DUCE. In spite of all its materialist efforts, production remains a utopia. We can wear ourselves out in materializing things, in. rendering them visible, but we will never cancel the secret. Herein really lies the ...The Superficial Abyss 65 paradox of a production which was mistaken about its finality, and which can therefore only exacerbate itself in a strange impotence. Even the protagonists of the secret would not know how to betray it, because it is no more than a ritual act of complicity, a sharing of the ab- sence of truth, and appearances. In seduction we rediscover the practice of this sharing and the intense pleasure which accompanies it. Thus in Kierkegaard’s The Diary Of A Seducer, the young girl is an enigmatic force and the process of seduction is the enigmatic resolution of this force, whose secret is never revealed. Had the secret been revealed it would have been sex, and sexuality would have been the nnal point of the story, had there indeed been one. But there is none, and in this regard psychoanalysis has deceived itself, and us. Beyond the story’s ending and beyond the determination of sex and its truth, seduction remains a duel and an enigmatic resolution. And so one can imagine that in amour- ous seduction the other is the locus of your secret ——the other unknowingly holds that which you will never have the chance to know. 66 Seduction, or... The other is not (as in love) the locus of your similarity, nor the ideal type of what you are, nor the hidden ideal of what you lack. It is the locus of that which eludes you, and whereby you elude yourself and your own truth. Seduc- tion is not the locus of desire (and thus of alienation) but of giddiness, of the eclipse, of appearanceand disappearance,of the scintilla- tion of being. It is an art of disappearing, whereas desire is always the desire for death. The secret is never the repressed. It is never “everything you don’t know and have always wanted to know about yourself and sex” (Woody Allen), it is that which no longer pertains to the order of truth. That which, saturated with itself, withdraws from itself, plunging into the secret and absorbing everything surrounding it. An immediately contagious giddiness: seduction operates through the subtle pleasure which beings and things experience in remaining secret in their very sign ——while truth operates through the obscene drive of forcing signs to reveal everything. Seduction does not only revolve around ...The Superncial Abyss 67 the fundamental rule — it IS the fundamental rule, and it exists only by virtue of never being uttered. Take provocation, for instance, which is the opposite and the caricature of seduction. It says: “I know that you want to be seduced, and I will seduce you.” Nothing could be worse than betraying this secret rule. Nothing could be less seductive than a provocative smile or inciteful behavior, since both pre- suppose that one cannot be seduced naturally and that one needs to be blackmailed into it, or through a declaration of intent: “Let me seduce you....” Seduction is not desire. It is that which plays with desire, which scoffs at desire. It is that which eclipses desire, making it appear and disappear. It brings forth appearances before desire only to hurl it back to its very end. First of all Brahma created from his own immaculate substancea goddessknown by the name of Sharatuya. When he saw this glorious girl born of his own body, he fell in love with her. Sharatuya (who has a hundred forms) moved to the right to avoid his gaze, but no sooner had she done so than a head appeared 68 Seduction, or... on the nght side of the god’s body. And as Sharatuya turned to the left, passing behind him, two more heads appeared. Brahma then spoke to his daughter: “Let us give birth to all kinds of animated creatures, to men, suras and asuras.” On hearing these words, Sharatuya re- turned to earth. Brahma married her, and they withdrew to a secret p1ace,where they lived together for a hundred divine years... ' Strategy of absence, of evasion, of metamorphosis. An unlimited possibility of substitution, of concatenation without refer- ence. To divert, to set up decoys, which dis- perse evidence, which disperse the order of things, the order of desire... to slightly displace appearances in order to hit the empty and strategic heart of things. This is the strategy of oriental martial arts: never aim straight at your adversary or his weapon, never look at him, look to the side, to the empty point from where he rushes and hit there, at the empty center of the act, at the empty center of the weapon. So it is with Chuan Tzu’s butcher: never see the 0x, remove the evidence of the ox’s body, in order to reach the interstitial emptinesswhich ...The Superficial Abyss 69 joins the organs, and thereto bring the edge of your blade. It is the same with desire in seduction: never take the initiative of desire, any more than the one of attack. The one who attacks first is lost, the one who desires first is lost. Never oppose one’s desire to the desire of the other, but aim at the hollow spot of appear- ance, or trap him in his own lure. For seduc- tion, desire does not exist any more than luck exists for the gambler. It is at most that which allows one to play: a stake. It is that which must be seduced,as everything else, as God, as the law, the truth, the unconscious, the real. All these things only exist in the brief instant when one challenges them to exist; they exist only by virtue of this challenge to which we call them, precisely through seduction, which opens the sublime abyss before them ——the abyss into which they will plunge ceaselessly in a last glimmer of reality. If one renects upon it, we exist only in the brief instant when we are seduced — by whatever moves us: an object, a face, an idea, a word, a passion. Such is the attraction of the dark body 70 Seduction, or... of seduction. Things seem to follow their lin- ear truth, their line of truth, but they reach their peak elsewhere, in the cycle of appearances. Things aspire to be straight, like light in an or- thogonal space, but they all have a secret cur- vature. Seduction is that which follows this curvature, subtly accentuating it until things, in following their own cycle, reach the superncial abyss where they are dissolved. Rare are those things which attain pure appearance. Nonetheless it is possible to con- ceive of seduction as the ineluctable dimension of each and every thing. No need to stageit as a strategy. By their own instigation; things are initiated into this fundamental rule, this superi- or convention, which orders a stake other than the real. We, like all systems, are eager to go beyond our own reality principle and to refract ourselves in another logic. Thus in gambling money is seduced;it is deviated from the law of value and is trans- formed into a substance of bidding and chal- lenge. Desire, then, becomes the stake of ano- ther game which transcends it, and in which the protagonists of desire are only extras. So ...The Superficial Abyss 71 even moral law can be seduced: in perversion, it enters as a tactical element in a ritual and ceremonial space ——perversion makes moral law function as a pure convention, and the divine asa diabolical artifice. The principle of reversibility, which is also the one of magic and seduction, requires that all that has been produced must be de- stroyed, and that which appears must disap- pear. We have unlearned the art of disappear- ance (art as such has always been a powerful lever of disappearance——power of illusion and of a denegation of the real). Saturated by the mode of production, we must return to the path of an aesthetic of disappearance.16Seduction is party to this: it is that which deviates, that which turns us away from the path, that which makes the real return to the great game of sim- ulacra, which makes things appear and disap- pear. It could almost be the sign of an original reversibility of things. One could maintain that before having been produced the world was seduced, that it exists, as all things and our- selves, only by virtue of having been seduced. Strangeprecession,which hangs over all real- 72 Seduction, 0r... ity to this day: the world has been refuted and led astrayfrom the beginning. 17 Because it has been led astray from the beginning, it is impossible that the world should ever verify or be reconciled with itself. Historical negativity is only a pious version of things. This original deviation is truly diabol- ical. The giddiness of simulation, the satanic ravishing 0f the excentricity 0f the beginning and the end opposes itself to the utopia of the Last Judgement, complemented by the one of the original baptism. Our entire moral anthro- pology, spanning from Christianity to Rous- seau, original sin to original innocence, is fals. Original sin must be replaced, not by final salvation, nor innocence, but by original seduction. Man is neither guilty nor innocent ——he is seducedand he seduces. Whether he is guilty or innocent, this is his status as a subject-seducedand seducer,this is his destiny as an object, his objective destiny. The reader will have realized how Manichean this theory is. To evoke seduction is to further our destiny as an object. To touch upon the object. To rouse the principle of Evil. ...The Superficial Abyss 73 Seduction is, therefore, ineluctable, and appearance always victorious. Of course we are witnessing a proliferation of systems of meaning and interpretation which seek to clear the path for a rational operation of the world. Interpretation is all the rage and is endowed, it seems, with a destructive violence — psycho- analysis, with its theory of desire and repres- sion, is probably the last and most beautiful of these great systems of interpretation. At the same time it is evident that all these systems are prevented from producing anything based on truth or objectivity. Deep down everything is already there, in this evil reversal — the impossibility for all systems to be founded on truth, to break open the secret and reveal whatever it may be. The discourse of truth is quite Simply impossible. It eludes itself. Every- thing eludes itself, everything scoffs at its own truth, seduction renders everything elusive. The fury to unveil the truth, to get at the naked truth, the one which haunts all dis- courses of interpretation, the obscene rage to uncover the secret, is proportionate to the im- possibility of ever achieving this. The more 74 Seduction, or... one nears truth, the more it retreats towards the omega point, and the greater becomes the rage to get at it. But this rage, this fury, only bears witness to the eternity of seduction and to the impossibility of mastering it. The present system of dissuasion and simulation succeeds in neutralizing all finali- ties, all referentials, all meanings, but it fails to neutralize appearances. It forcefully controls all the procedures for the production of mean- ing. It does not control the seduction of ap- pearances. No interpretation can explain it, no system can abolish it. It is our last chance. There is, in this sense,a contemporary strategy of seduction which would counter the surveillance and computer processes, the ever more s0phisticated methods of biological and molecular control and retrieval of bodies, all the procedures of identification (which have replaced those of alienation), of forced iden- tity, of detection and dissuasion. - How does one disguise oneself? - How does one dissimulate oneself? - How does one parry in disguise, in silence, in the game of signs, indifference ——in ...The Superncial Abyss 75 a strategy of appearance? Seduction as an invention of strate- gems, of the body, as a disguise for survival, as an infinite dispersion of lures, as an art of dis- appearanceand absence, as a dissuasion which is stronger yet than that of the system. The evil forces which it has raised against God, against morality, the forces of ar- tince and the Evil Demon of dissimulation and absence, of challenge and reversion, which it has always embodied and for which it has been damned: seduction can today reinvent these forces, and raise them against the terrorist seiz- ing of truth and verification, of identification and programming which engulf us. Seduction remains the enchanted form of the devil’s share.  FROM THE SYSTEM OF OBJECTS TO THE DESTIN Y OF OBJECTS "The essential exoticism is that of the Object for the subject." Victor Segalen. Simulation, the generalized passage to the code and the sign-value, was at first de- scribed in critical terms, in the light (or sha- dow) of a problematic of alienation. It was still the society of spectacle,and its denuncia- tion, which was the focal point of the semiol- ogical, psychoanalytical, and sociological arguments. Subversion was still sought in the transgression of the categories of political economy: use-value, exchange-value, equiva- 77 78 From the Systemof Objects... lence. The referents of this transgression were to be Georges Bataille’s notion of expenditure and Marcel Mauss’s exchange-gift; in other words, another anthropological, anti-economi— stic version, which generalizes the Marxist cri- tique of capital and commodity in a radical an- thropoligical critique of Marx’s postulates. In L’Echange Symbolique et la Mort this critique went beyond political economy: it is death it- self which becomes the very ngure of rever- sibility (i.e., a reversal of all the codes and dis- tinctive oppositions on which the dominant systems are founded: in the first place, the op- position of life and death — with the exclusion of death; that of subject and object, signifier andsignined,masculineandfeminine).18The transgression of the code is the reversion of opposite terms, and therefore of the calculated differences through which the dominance of one term over the other is established. The “symbolic” is the figure of this reversion, and by the same token the figure of any possible revolution: “The revolution will be symbolic or will not be at all.” As Saussure described in his “Anagrammes,” even in the order of lang- ...To the Destiny of Objects 79 uage poetry is this reversibility of each term of the discourse, its ex-termination. Hence, the movement is one that counters an order of sim- ulation; it is a system of distinctive oppositions regulating a meaning, and a movement striving to restore a symbolic order assimilated to a superior authenticity of exchanges. This double spiral moves from Le Sys- témedesObjetsto theFatal Strategies:19a spi- ral swerving towards a sphereof the sign, the simulacrum and simulation, 3 Spiral of the re— versibility of all signs in the shadow of seduc- tion and death. The two paradigms are diversi- fied in the course of this spiral without alterin g their antagonistic position. On the one hand: political economy, production, the code, the system, simulation. On the other hand: pot- lach, expenditure, sacrifice, death, the femin- ine, seduction, and in the end, the fatal. However, both have undergone consid- erable innection. The simulacra have passed from the second order to the third, from the dialectic of alienation to the giddiness of trans- parency.20 At the same time, after L’Echange Symbolique and with De la Séduction 21 the 80 From the Systemof Objects... dream of a transgression, of a possible subver- sion of codes, and the nostalgia for a symbolic order of any kind, born out of the deep of pri- mitive societies, or of our historical alienation, have been lost. With Séduction, there is no longer any symbolic referent to the challenge of signs, and to the challenge through signs, no more lost object, no more recovered object, no more original desire. The object itself takes the initiative of reversibility, taking the initia- tive to seduceand lead astray. Another succes- sion is determinant. It is no longer that of a symbolic order (which requires a subject and a discourse), but the purely arbitrary one of a rule of the game. The game of the world is the game of reversibility. It is no longer the desire of the subject, but the destiny of the object, which is at the center of the world. In capitalist societies everything cannot be reduced to the dialectic of desire. To get back to the issue, if signs have a destination from the beginning, they must also have a destiny. And the destiny of signs is to be torn from their destination, deviated, displaced, diverted, recuperated, seduced. It is their des- ...T0 the Destiny of Objects 81 tiny in the sensethat this is what always hap- pens to them; it is our destiny in the sensethat this is what always happens to us. This is pro- foundly immoral. In every reversibility there is something immoral, which proceeds from a superior irony. This is a prominent theme in all mythologies and cultures other than our own. In our systems we have given priority to the irrerversibility of time, production, and his- tory. Only that which refutes this all-too- beautiful order of the irreversibility of time, and the nnality of things, can be fascinating. Transgression is not immoral. Quite t0 the contrary, it reconciles the law with what it forbids; it is the dialectical game of good and evil. Reversibility is not a law; it does not es- tablish a symbolic order, and it can’t be trans- gressed any more than can a ceremony or the rules of a game. In reversibility time is not reconciled with its end, nor the subject with its finality. There is no Last Judgement t0 seper- ate Good from Evil, and reconcile things with their essence. Against all the pious and dialectical esotericisms, by which the subject cultivates 82 F mm the Systemof Objects... the principle of his own end, one must raise this radical Exotericism, a renection of the essential Exotericism of Segalen, the one of the Object for the subject.22As Segalen puts it: “If taste increasesin terms of difference then what could be more savory than the opposition of irreducibles, the clash of eternal contrasts?” Against all interion'ties, one must awaken this Externality, this exterior power which; beyond the nnal principle of the subject, raises the fatal reversibility of the Object. One must rouse the principle of Evil. This is the only scale by which we can measure our present situation. By dint of meaning, information, and transparence our societies have passed beyond the limit point, that of permanent ecstasy: the ecstasy of the social (the masses), the body (obesity), sex (obscenity), violence (terror), and information (simulation). If, in fact, the era of transgres- sion has ended, it is that things themselves have transgressedtheir own limits. If one can no longer reconcile things with their essence,it is because they have mocked and surpassed their own definition. They have become more ...To the Destiny of Objects 83 social than the social (the masses), fatter than fat (obesity), more violent than the violent (terror), more sexual than sex (porn), more real than the real (simulation), more beautiful than the beautiful (fashion). Hence, more beautiful than me you die, truer than me you die, more real than me you simulate, and more simulated than me you die... For critical theory one must therefore substitute a fatal theory, to bring this objective irony of the world to completion. It is so much more fun to see our uni- verse destined to fatality, which is not tran- scendent but immanent in our very processes, in their superfusion, in their overdrive, in their surmultiplication, immanent in our banality, which is also the indifference of things towards their own meaning, the indifference of effects towards their very causes. All this constitutes an original situation; that of an Evil Demon driven by a silent strategy. This is no longer the irony of the subject faced with an objective order, but the objective irony of things caught in their own devices ——no longer the historical workings of the negative, but the workings of 84 F mm the System of Objects... reduplication and the rising stakes, as one can seein the Witz, the equivalent of this fatal stra- tegy for language.23 In the Witz, language makes itself more imbecile than it really is; it escapes its own dialectic and concatenation of meaning only to hurl itself into a process of delirious contiguity, into instanteousness,into pure contiguity, into pure “objectality.” The evil demon‘ of lan- guage resides in its capacity to become object, where one expects a subject and meaning. The Witz is the predestination of language to be- come nonsense from the instant it is caught in its own devices. In this there is passion, a passion of the object, which could very well make us rediscover an aesthetic force of the world, beyond peripeteia and subjective pas- sions. The banal, which Heidegger called the secondfall of Man, after Original Sin, this very banal becomes prodigious. This is the fatality of the modern world, whose astounding depth raises to challenge reality itself. Against the banal vision (conventional and religious) of the fatal, one must set up a ...T0 the Destiny of Objects 85 fatal vision of the banal. It is at the extremities of this monotony, this insignincance, this in- difference of our systems, that the sequences, unfoldings, and processes——which no longer proceed from cause and effect ——appear; a challenge that is immanent in the very un- folding of things. This challenge is neither religious nor transcendent, and if there is a strategy here, it is no one’s. It is an immanent reversion of all rational enterprises of structu— ration and power. As is evident in the social behavior of the masses (their silence, this excess of silence, which is not at all passive, but rather an overbid of silence and a strategy of indifference),24 as well as in the excrescence of production, the uncontrolled nuctuation of currencies,the obeseperson’s relationship with his body, or the monotony of our lives, which is a monotony on the second level (due to the excessof meaning, information, and visibility). Here things operate as though there were a will to challenge, as opposed to a willing servitude: a genius of indifference, which Victoriously opposes itself to all enterprises of meaning and difference, but which cannot be attributed to 86 F ram the System of Objects... one group, one class, or to particular individ- uals. Something forms a ground (fair masse), something engaged in a potential reversal at odds with the 01d dialectic of things, or rather foreign to it. This is the silent logic of excre- sence, of excess, of deviation by excess, of a generalized reversibility springing from our very strategies, of our systems at the pinnacle of their efficiency. Our all-too-beautiful strategies of his- tory, knowledge, and power are erasing them- selves. It is not because they have failed (they have, perhaps, succeededtoo well) but because in their progression they reached a dead point where their energy was inverted and they de- voured themselves, giving way to a pure and empty, or crazy and ecstatic, form.25 Thus the social in its systematic extension creates fatal conditions for the social itself. The masses plunge into an ecstatic indifference, into the pornography of information, and place them- selves in the heart of the system, at the blind and inert spot from which they neutralize and annul it. The massesuse information in order to disappear; information uses the massesas a ...To the Destiny of Objects 87 shroud — a marvelous ruse of our history (of the end of our history) where sociologists,poli- ticians and massmediaticians are dumb- founded. Through the sophistication of its methodology, science annihilates its object: to survive, science is forced to artificially repro- duce the object as a model of simulation. Again the object takes revenge in that it exists only as a simulation in the grip of our technol- ogy. Everywhere it seems that the subject has simultaneously lost its gyroscope and its refer- entials, as well as the control over things, and faces a reversion of its powers where it once counted on their continuity. The Object and the world let them- selves be surprised for an instant (a brief in- stant in the general cosmology) by the subject and science, but today they are violently re- asserting themselves and taking revenge (like the crystal!). Such is the figure of our fatality, that of an objective turnaround, of an objective reversal of the world. The term “fatal” has nothing fatalistic or apocalyptic about it. What is implied by this term is this metamorphosisof effects (and no 88 From the System of Objects... longer a metaphysics of causes), in a universe which is neither deterministic nor aleatory, but destined to a succession of a higher necessity. This higher necessity brings things to a point of no return, in a spiral which is no longer that of their production, but of their disappearance. That which is linked outside of the subject, that which is on the side of the subject’s disappear- ance, is fatal. All that which is no longer a human strategy becomes a fatal strategy by that very token. Yet there is nothing transcendent about this fatality, nor can it be invoked from the outside. The fatal is always an anticipation of the end in the beginning, a precession of the end whose effect is to topple the system of cause and effect. It is a temptation to pass to the other side of the end, to go beyond this horizon,to denythisperpetuallyfuturestateof things. The Object, then, is always already a fair accompli. It is without nnitude and with- out desire, for it has already reached its end. In a way, it is transnnite. The object is therefore inaccesible to the subject’s knowledge, since there can be no knowledge of that which a1- ...To the Destiny of Objects 89 ready has complete meaning, and more than its meaning, and of which there can be no utOpia, for it has already been created. This is what makes the Object a perpetual enigma for the subject. This is what makes it fatal. If the complexity of the universe were only hidden to our knowledge, it would end up by being resolved. However, if the universe is a challenge to the successive solutions offered, even the most subtle of hypotheses have no chance. Because it rennesitself to infinity, the universe is reversed in accord with science. Adapting itself through a superior ruse, it reacts like a virus to antibiotics, all the while maintaining its virulence. Our knowledge would do well to revise its objectives in terms of this supple and antagonistic strategy. Yet, it is hopeless, because if science has fostered a vision of the world in terms of problems that are temporarily unsolved, the world itself re- sists all solutions. Even at such a cost it ac- cepts, ironically as it were, to conform itself to the hypotheses. Yet, is the emergence of a necessity other than the human, of a strategy overcoming 90 From the Systemof Objects... the human and the subject, not a mystery? How does one explain the ironic fatality of the object, which has become indecipherable under the pressure of our procedures of control and analysis? Is there any point in waging on the geniality of the Object, or is this “fatal strat- egy” only a blind bid of the subject, a negation of the real, a plunge into artificial ecstasy? How could the subject dream of leaping over its own shadow, and of sinking into the perfect silence and destiny of stones, beasts, masks, and stars? It cannot rid itself of language, of desire, or of its own image, because the object only exists in that it is designated and desired by the subject. One thing is for certain: if it is absurd for the subject to become object, then it is equally inconsequent to dream that the object can become subject. This is, however, what is maintained by the science and conscience of the Western world. Everybody wants to be- lieve that the world becomes subject and the subject becomes the world. Even though this subjectivity is, strictly speaking, unthinkable. Even though the world is marvelously objec- ...T0 the Destiny of Objects 91 tive in a sensethat is exactly opposed to that of materialism and science. The subject itself is marvelously objective, i.e., it cannot be alien- ated. Is it not its own fable, which it is telling through language and the mirror of alienation? If nothing has finality, everything is metamor- phosis, everything is its own fable. There is no other meaning to the “destiny of the Object.” There is a radical convergence and di- vergence between these two extremes: from the object as system to the Object as destiny, from the object as structure, as structural sign, to the Object as a pure sign, as “crystal”. It was already the obsession of objects in their everyday configuration to pass through the subject, to reverse the dialectic of subject and object. If the approach was one of a critical structuralism, called for by the spirit of the times, then the wresting of objects from their current determinations (use, exchange, func- tion, equivalence, projection, identification, alienation) was already a means of crossing to the other side of the mirror. But, after all, the object is still called upon to signify. It is the passive term of the investigation; it is neither a 92 F mm the Systemof Objects... destiny nor a challenge, and in this situation the best the object can do is hide, as we have told it to do. The crystal is altogether different. It is the pure Object, the pure event, which doesn’t exactly have a beginning or end, and now, perhaps, begins to tell its tale. Maybe now, after centuries of willing servitude, it may even begin to take revenge? Everything is being reversed into the enigma of an Object, en- dowed with passions and original strategies, an object in which one sensesthe evil genius, a genius more evil and more genial deep down than the subject, whose endeavors it victo- riously opposes in a kind of endlessduel. Let us imagine the Object in a passion- ate form. For the subject does not have the monopoly of passion —-—in fact its reserved domain would more likely be that of action. The Object is passive in the sensethat it is the locus of an objective, seductive and vengeful passion. This world, which we have far more often sought to interpret and transform rather than seduce, seeks perhaps to seduce us, and this seduction, as in the human reign, entails ...T0 the Destiny of Objects 93 intelligence, cunning, denance,and vengeance. If this has been concealed to us until now, it is because the subject has made the world into the metaphor of its own passions. It colonized everything: the bestial, mineral, astral, histori- cal, and mental. But the object is not metaphor, it is passion, pure and simple. And the subject is perhaps only a mirror where objective pas- sions come to be renected and played out. If the object seducesus, it is initially through its indifference. The subject passion- ately desires to become free, autonomous, re- sponsible, different. The Object, however, has the passion of indifference. The passions of the subject are differential, energetic, ethical and heroic passions. Indifferential, inertial passions are those of the Object. The ironic passions of cunning, silence, conformity, and willing servitude are opposed to passions of liberty, desire, transgression, the passions of the subject. Implosive passions versus ex- plosive passions. Yet above all the subject has the passion to be object, to become object ——- an enigmatic desire, whose consequenceswe have barely evaluated in all domains, whether 94 F mm the Systemof Objects... political, aesthetic, or sexual, lost as we are in the illusion of the subject, its will and its representation. Thecrystaltakesrevenge.26 The Sphere of the soul’s passions, the major concern of psychology and fiction for two or three centuries, has considerably dim- inished. The sphere of “drives,” which has only been the major concern for fifty years, also seems threatened. What is left? Of all possible movements of the soul, only two apparently contradictory ones seem to remain: indifference and impatience. They oppose the traditional qualities of the soul. Indifference opposes the soul’s passionate ambition towards attaining transcendence, while impatience opposes the traditional “patience of the soul,” this virtue put to the test by the world. Actu- ally, these are no longer passions of the soul, subjective passions. There is no longer a sub- ject of indifference or impatience. These are objective passions. The world is becoming indifferent, and the more indifferent it becomes, the closer it seems to move towards a superhuman event, ...T0 the Destiny of Objects 95 an exceptional ending renected in our increas- ing impatience. Not only we, but history and events seem to be prey to the combined effects of impatience and indifference. It is not I who is indifferent or impa- tient. The world itself seems to want to hurry, to exacerbate itself, losing patience with the slowness of things, and at the same time it sinks into indifference. It is no longer we who give the world meaning in transcending or renecting upon it. The indifference of the world in this respect is marvelous; marvelous is the indifference of things in respect to us, and yet things passionatelyunfold and confuse their appearances. (The Stoics had already ex- pressedall this with great eloquence.) WHY THEORY? It is here that language and theory alter their meaning. Instead of acting as a mode of production, they act as a mode of disappear- ance, just as the Object has become the sub- ject’s mode of disappearance. This enigmatic game is no longer that of analysis; it seeks to preserve the enigma of the object through the enigma of discourse. To be the renection of the real, to enter into a relation of critical negativity with the real, cannot be theory’s end. This was the pious vow of a perpetuated era of Enlighten- ment, and to this day it determines the moral standing of the intellectual. Today, however, this appealing dialectic seemsunsettled. What good is theory? If the world is hardly compat- 97 98 Why Theory? ible with the concept of the real which we impose upon it, the function of theory is cer- tainly not to reconcile it, but on the contrary, to seduce,to wrest things from their condition, to force them into an over-existence which is in- compatible with that of the real. Theory pays dearly for this in a prOphetic autodestruction. Even if it speaks of surpassing the economic, theory itself could not be an economy of dis- course. It must become excessive and sacrifi- cial to speak about excess and sacrifice. It must become simulation if it speaksabout sim- ulation, and deploy the same strategy as its object. If it speaks about seduction, theory must become seducer, and deploy the same strategems. If it no longer aspires to a dis- course of truth, theory must assumethe form of a world from which truth has withdrawn. And' thus it becomes its very object. The status of theory could not be any- thing but a challenge to the real. Or rather, their relation is one of a respective challenge. For the real itself is without doubt only a chal- lenge to theory. It is not an objective state of things, but a radical limit of analysis beyond Why Theory? 99 which nothing any longer obeys the real, or about which nothing more can be said. But theory is also made solely to disobey the real, of which it is the inaccessible limit. The impossibility of reconciling theory with the real is a consequence of the impossibility of reconciling the subject with it own ends. All attempts at reconciliation are illusory and doomed to failure. It is not enough for theory to describe and analyse, it must itself be an event in the universe it describes. In order to do this theory must partake of and become the acceleration of this logic. It must tear itself from all referents and take pride only in the future. Theory must operate on time at the cost of a deliberate dis- tortion of present reality. In this one must follow the model of history, which has sepa- rated many things from their nature and mythi- cal origin in order to reverse them in time. Today they must be wrested from their history and their end to recapture their enigma, their reversible path, their destiny. Theory itself must anticipate its own destiny, because for every thought one must 100 Why Theory? expect a strange tomorow. Theory is, at any rate, destined to be diverted, deviated, and ma- nipulated. It would be better for theory to divert itself, than to be diverted from itself. If it aspires to any enetsde vérité it must eclipse them through its own movement. This is why writing exists. If thought does not anticipate this deviation in its own writing, the world: will do so through vulgarization, the spectacle or repetition. If truth does not dissimulate itself, the world will conjure it away by diverse means, by a kind of objective irony, or ven- geance. Once again, what is the point of saying that the world is ecstatic, that it is ironic, that the world is objective? It is those things, that’s that. What is the point of saying that it is not? It is so anyway. What is the point of not say- ing it at all? What theory can do is to defy the world to be more: more objective, more ironic, moreseductive,morerealor moreunreal,what else? It has meaning only in terms of this exor- cism. The distance theory takes is not that of retreat, but that of exorcism. It thus takes on the power of a fatal sign, even more inexorable Why Theory? 101 than reality, and which can perhaps protect us from this inexorable reality, this objectivity, from this brilliance of the world, whose indif- ference would enrage us if we were lucid. Let us be Stoies: if the world is fatal, let us be more fatal than it. If it is indifferent, let us be more indifferent. We must conquer the world and seduce it through an indifference that is at least equal to the world’s. To counter the accelerationof networks and circuits the world will seek slowness, inertia. In the same movement, however, it will seeksomething more rapid than communi- cation: the challenge, the duel. On the one side, inertia and silence. On the other, chal- lenge and the duel. The fatal, the obscene, the reversible, the symbolic, are not concepts, since nothing distinguishes the hypotheses from the assertion. The enunciation of the fatal is also fatal, or it is not at all. In this sense it is indeed a discourse where truth has withdrawn (just as one pulls a chair out from under a person about to sit down). CONCLUSION* And what if reality dissolved before our very eyes? Not into nothingness, but into the more real than real (the triumph of simulaera)? What if the modern universe of communica- tion, of hyper-communication, had plunged us, not into the senseless, but into a tremendous saturation of meaning entirely consumed by its success——without the game, the secret, or dis- tance? If all publicity were the apology, not of a product, but of publicity? If information no longer had anything to do with an event, but were concerned with promoting information itself as the event? If history were only an accumulative, instantaneous memory without a *This summary, actually an excerpt from a review- article by Guy Scarpetta,was inadvertently included by Band- rillard in manuscript form, but retained thereafter.[Ed.] 103 104 Conclusion past? If our society were no longer that of the “spectacle,” as was said in ’68, but, cynically, that of ceremony? If politics were increasingly a dated continent, replaced by the dizziness of terrorism, of a generalized hostage-taking, this very figure of the impossible exchange? If all this mutation did not arise out of a manipula- tion of subjectsand opinions, as somebelieved, but out of a logic without a subject, a logic in which Opinion has collapsed into fascination? If pornography signified the end of the sexual as such,from the instant that sex in its obscene form has invaded everything? If seduction followed desire and love, that is, once again the reign of the object and that of the subject? If, as a result, strategy replaced psychology? If it were no longer a question of setting truth against illusion, but of perceiving the prevalent illusion as truer than truth? If no other behav- ior were possible but to learn, ironically, to disappear? If there were no more fractures, no more vanishing lines, no more lines of rupture, but only a surface that is full and continuous, surface without depth, without interruption? And if all this were neither exciting, nor despairing——but fatal? the gulfwar did not take place Jean Baudrillard The Gulf War did not take place Jean Baudrillard Translated and with an introduction by Paul Patton INDIANA UNIVERSITY PRESS BLOOMINGTON & INDIANAPOLIS This book is a publication of Indiana University Press 601 North Morton Street Bloomington, IN 47404-3797 USA http;//www.indiana.edu/-iupress Telephone orders 800-842-6796 Fax orders 812-855-7931 Orders bye-mail iuporder@indiana.edu English translation and introduction © 1995, Power Institute and Paul Patton The Gul/War did not take place was originally published in French as La Guerre du Golfe n 'a pas eu lieu. © 1991, Editions Galilee All rights reserved No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanicaL including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. The Association of American University Presses' Resolution on Permissions constitutes the only exception to this prohibition. The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. Manufactured in the United States of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Baudrillard, Jean. [Guerre du Golfe n'a pas eu lieu. English) The Gulf War did not take place I Jean Baudrillard ; translated and with an introduction by Paul Patton. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references (p. ). ISBN 0-253-32946-9 (alk. paper). ISBN 0-253-21003-8 (pbk. ; alk. paper) 1. Persian Gulf War, 1991-Miscellanea. 2. Persian Gulf War, 1991-Press coverage-Miscellanea. I. Title. DS79.72.B3813 1995 956.7044'2-dc20 95-19574 4 5 6 7 05 04 03 02 Contents Introduction Paui Patton 1 The Gulf War will not take place 23 The Gulf War: is it really taking place? 29 The Gulf War did not take place 61  The Gulf War did not tal{e place  Introductio n Jean Baudrillard's article, "The Gulf War will not take place, " was published in Liberation on 4 January 1991, a little over one month after the UN Security Council had voted to authorise the use of force if Iraq had not begun to remove its troops from Kuwait by January 1 5 , and a little under two weeks before the American and British air attack on Baghdad and Iraqi positions in Kuwait. Far from being deterred by the unfolding situation, he wrote two more pieces along similar lines: "The Gulf War: is it really taking place?" which referred to the events during February 1991, and "The Gulf War did not take place," which was written after the end of hostilities on 28 February. Part of the second article appeared in Liberation on 6 February while a fragment of the third article appeared in Liberation on 2 9 March 19 91. All three pieces first appeared in extended form in the book published in May 1991.1 The central thesis of Baudrillard's essays appears to be direct ly contradicted by the facts. What took place during January and February 19 9 1 was a massive aerial bombardment of Iraq's military and civil infrastructure. According to some accounts, the amount of high explosive unleashed in the first month of the conflict exceeded that of the entire allied air offensive during 2 The Gulf War WW 11.2 This was followed by a systematic air and land assault on the Iraqi forces left in Kuwait, which culminated in the infa mous "turkey shoot" carried out on the troops and others flee ing along the road to Basra. Official estimates of lives lost as direct casualties of these attacks are in the order of 1 00,000, but these do not take into account the subsequent loss of life due to hunger and disease. On the face of it, Baudrillard could not have been more wrong. So why did he pursue this line of argument which appears to deny the reality of the Gulf War? At the time, the TV Gulf War must have seemed to many view ers a perfect Baudrillardian simulacrum, a hyperreal scenario in which events lose their identity and signifiers fade into one another. Fascination and horror at the reality which seemed to unfold before our very eyes mingled with a pervasive sense of unreality as we recognised the elements of Hollywood script which had preceded the real (the John Wayne language and bearing of the military spokesmen), and as the signifiers of past events faded into those of the present (the oil-soaked sea bird recycled from the Exxon Valdez to warn of impending eco-disas ter in the GulO . Occasionally, the absurdity of the media's self representation as purveyor of reality and immediacy broke through, in moments such as those when the CNN cameras crossed live to a group of reporters assembled somewhere in the Gulf, only to have them confess that they were also sitting around watching CNN in order to find out what was happen ing. Television news coverage appeared to have finally caught up with the logic of simulation. Introduction 3 It was not the first time that images of war had appeared on TV screens, but it was the first time that they were relayed "live" from the battlefront. It was not the first occasion on which the military censored what could be reported, but it did involve a new level of military control of reportage and images. Military planners had clearly learnt a great deal since Vietnam: procedures for controlling the media were developed and tested in the Falklands, Grenada and Panama. As a result, what we saw was for the most part a "clean" war, with lots of pictures of weaponry, including the amazing footage from the nose-cam eras of " smart bombs, " and relatively few images of human casualties , none from the Allied forces . In the words of one commentator, for the first time, "the power to create a crisis merges with the power to direct the movie about it . . . Desert Storm was the first major global media crisis orchestration that made instant history. "3 The Gulf War movie was instant histo ry in the sense that the selected images which were broadcast worldwide provoked immediate responses and then became frozen into the accepted story of the war: high-tech weapons, ecological disaster, the liberation of Kuwait. In case anyone missed the first release, CNN produced its own edited documen tary, "CNN: War in the Gulf' which was shown on TV around the world. Within weeks of the end of hostilities, Time Warner produced a CD-ROM disk on Desert Storm which included pub lished text, unedited correspondents' reports, photos and maps in the form of a single hypertext document. In their publicity, they described this interactive multimedia disk as a "first draft of history. " In "The Precession of Simulacra" Baudrillard took as an 4 The Gulf War allegory of simulation the Borges story in which the cartogra phers of an empire draw up a map so detailed that it exactly covers the territory.4 Thanks to the geographical data collected by the US Defense Mapping Agency, remote corners of the American Empire such as Kuwait already exist on hard disk. Just as it marked a new level of military control over the public representation of combat operations, so the Gulf War displayed a new level of military deployment of simulation technology. Technological simulacra neither displace nor deter the violent reality of war, they have become an integral part of its opera tional procedures. Virtual environments are now incorporated into operational warplanes, filtering the real scene and present ing aircrew with a more readable world.5 The development of flight simulators provided an early example of the computer technology which allowed the boundaries between simulation and reality to become blurred: the images and information which furnish the material for exercises and war games become indistinguishable from what would be encountered in a real conflict. The same technology now allows the creation of simulated environments in which to train tank crews, and even the possibility of connected simulators in which virtual tank battles can be fought out. An article in the first issue of Wired recounts developments in the use of networked simulation machines as training devices. Current research aims to achieve what is called "seamless manipulation" in which "the seams between reality and virtuality will be deliberately blurred" and "real tanks can engage simulator crews on real terrain which is simultaneously virtual. " Within months of the end of the war, army historians and simulation modelers had produced their Introduction 5 own multimedia, fully interactive, network capable digital sim ulation of one of the tank battles from the closing stages of the conflict: "armchair strategists can now fly over the virtual bat tlefield in the 'stealth vehicle. ' the so-called 'SIMNET flying carpet,' viewing the 3-D virtual landscape from any angle dur ing any moment of the battle. They can even change the para meters - give the Iraqis infrared targeting scopes, for instance, which they lacked at the time . . . this is virtual reality as a new way of knowledge: a new and terrible kind of transcendent mil itary power. "6 B audrillard at times portrays the Gulf conflict as one between a relentless and pre-programmed military machine and a hysterical trickster , a rug salesman whose essential weapons include the ruse and the decoy. (6 5-6) Quite apart from the orientalist overtones of this image, it underestimates the role played by dissimulation and deception operations within Allied military strategy. Electronic warfare involves new forms of deception by means of electronic interference and falsified signals. In the Gulf, such technological dissimula tion was combined with old-fashioned tactical deception manoeuvres on the ground, with apparent success. American agents even succeeded in introducing a computer virus into Iraq's air defence command and control system.7 Seen in this light, the use of the media to pass dis information to the other side is sim ply another dimension of a consistent strategic embrace of the logic of simulation. The Gulf War thus witnessed the birth of a new kind of military apparatus which incorporates the power to control the production and circulation of images as well as the power to direct the actions of bodies and machines. It 6 The Gulf War involved a new kind of event and a new kind of power which is at once both real and simulacral. Baudrillard's essays pursue a high-risk writing strategy, court ing equally the dangers of contradiction by the facts and self refutation . They occasionally force the facts to fit their own rhetorical oppositions: for example, in claiming that "no acci dents occurred in this war, everything unfolding according to programmatic order. " (73) They rail against the proliferation of useless commentaries, yet do not hesitate to offer commentary of their own: for example, suggesting that there are more tricks to the wily Arab opponent than the Pentagon strategists sus pect. (81) This is Baudrillard as armchair strategist and expert in the stratagems of symbolic exchange. They denounce the emptiness of the media event but also seek to endow it with the status of being an exemplary non-event . But these are not scholarly analyses of the events themselves, nor even of their media representation. Baudrillard is reluctant to claim the sta tus of philosophy, sociology or political analysis for his writing, but equally resistant to its dismissal as literature or poetry. In time and with a little imagination, he has since suggested, it will be possible to read The Gulf War did not take place as if it were a science fiction novel. 8 These are occasional essays by a writer who believes that writing should be less a representation of reality than its transfiguration and that it should pursue a "fatal strategy" of pushing things to extremes. They are also immediate responses to instant history TV and its first draft ver sions in the print media. As such, they belong in the series of Introduction 7 his essays which includes a discussion of the staged massacre at Timisoara, and the equally provocatively titled response to a television link-up with Sarajevo, "No Pity for Sarajevo. "9 The timing of their composition is important. "The Gulf War will not take place" was written in December 1990 and January 1991. when the final act of the Gulf crisis was still to be played out. At one level, the response expressed in this article is a kind of fUite en avant, a sardonic challenge to the media hype surrounding the Gulf crisis . The point being made is that the events which were unfolding did not and would not correspond to what Baudrillard called the "archaic imaginary of media hysteria. " ( 56) This imaginary obj ect of media speculation was total war in the 1940s sense, including the use of chemical and perhaps even nuclear weapons. War in that sense did not take place, even though massive damage was inflicted by means of conventional weapons . B audrillard' s response to the subsequent events pursues the symbolic chal lenge to the manner in which these were portrayed. It is not irony so much as the kind of black humour which seeks to sub vert w h a t is b e i n g said by pursuing its implicit logic to extremes: so you want us to believe that this was a clean, mini malist war, with little collateral damage and few Allied casual ties. Why stop there: war? what war? Rhetoric aside, Baudrillard's first essay is also a response to the question which remained open at the time: will there or will there not be war? His answer points to an irony in events them selves which derives from the fact that war itself has become virtual. The hypothesis of "The Gulf War will not take place" is that the deterrence of war in the traditional sense has been 8 The Gulf War internalised and turned back upon the Western powers, pro ducing a form of self-deterrence which renders them incapable of realising their own power in the form of relations of force. Under present conditions, Baudrillard argues, the virtual has overtaken the actual, it functions to deter the real event and leaves only the simulacrum of war which will never advance to the use of force: "we are no longer in a logic of the passage from virtual to actual but in a hyperrealist logic of the deterrence of the real by the virtual. " ( 2 7) The underlying argument of this initial essay is that the l o g i c of deterre n c e h a s t r a n s formed the n ature of w a r . Deterrence i s a matter o f the virtual exercise o f power, action upon the action of the other by immaterial means. It is a means of waging war, but one in which the aim is precisely non engagement or the avoidance of direct encounter between the parties involved. The Cold War was indeed a war, one that has been fought and won, but increasingly by economic, informa tional and electronic mean s . It was a war fo ught on the principle of deterrence, on the basis of an economic, R&D and informational effort to deter any use of material force by the other side. It was won when the Soviet economic and political system could no longer maintain the effort. In the process, Baudrillard suggests, war evolved in a manner parallel to the evolution of capital: "just as wealth is no longer measured by the ostentation of wealth but by the secret circulation of speculative capital, so war is not measured by being unleashed but by its speculative unfolding in an abstract, electronic and i n fo r m a t i o n a l s p a c e , t h e s a me o n e in w h i c h c ap i t a l moves . " ( 56) This does not mean that i t i s unreal i n the sense of Introduction 9 not having real effects. any more than a capital crisis is unreal because it takes place in the electronic and informational space of digitalised and networked financial markets. Rather. it means that state-of-the-art military power is now virtual in the sense that it is deployed in an abstract. electronic and informa tional space. and in the sense that its primary mechanism is no longer the use of force. Virtual war is therefore not simply the image or imaginary representation of real war. but a qualita tively different kind of war. the effects of which include the sup pression of war in the old sense. Shortly after the publication of "The Gulf War will not take place" the bombing began in earnest. At the end of that essay. Baudrillard offers a reason for undertaking what he calls the "stupid gamble" of attempting to demonstrate the impossibility of war in the Gulf just at the moment when all the signs were pointing in the direction of its occurrence. namely the stupidity of not dOing so. ( 2 8) The stupidity in question is that of those critics who uncritically participate in the supposed realism of the information industry. or the stupidity of taking a position for or against the war without first interrogating the nature and type of reality proper to events such as those which unfold ed in the Gulf and on our TV screens. For Baudrillard. in these essays. "it is not a question of being for or against the war. It is a question of being for or against the reality of the war. Analysis must not be sacrificed to the expression of anger. It must be entirely directed against reality. against the evidence; here . against the evidence of this war. "lO 10 The Gulf War Accordingly, a primary concern of the second essay, "The Gulf War: is it really taking place? " , is to interrogate the nature· of the Gulf War as a media event. This is not a war but a simu lacrum of war, a virtual event which is less the representation of real war than a spectacle which serves a variety of political and strategic purposes on all sides. Here, the sense in which Baudrillard speaks of events as virtual is related to the idea that real events lose their identity when they attain the velocity of real time information, or to employ another metaphor, when they become encrusted with the information which represents them. In this sense, while televisual information claims to pro vide immediate access to real events, in fact what it does is pro duce informational events which stand in for the real, and which "inform" public opinion which in turn affects the course of subsequent events, both real and informational. As con sumers of mass media, we never experience the bare material event but only the informational coating which renders it "sticky and unintelligible" like the oil-soaked sea bird . (3 2 ) Where was this image captured and what oil spill caused it? Who caused the oil spill to begin with? To the extent that real events are mediated and portrayed by such selected images, they become contaminated by what Baudrillard calls " the structural unreality of images. "(46-7) The result is a new kind of entity, qualitatively different to "real" or "imaginary" events as these were understood prior to the advent of modern com munications technology: virtual media events. These are infor mational entities and one of their defining characteristics is to be always open to interpretation. Informational events are thus the objects of endless speculation: because a range of interpre- Introduction 11 tations is always possible, the identity of such events becomes vague or undecidable. Baudrillard's Gulf War essays provide many examples of such aporia: for example, throughout much of its duration, the war is both a non-event, an empty war in the sense that there is a lack of real engagement between the combatants, and an excessive, superabundant war in terms of the quantity of personnel and material involved.(33-4) On the one hand, the American decision-makers are unable to per ceive the Other in any terms but their own, and as a result they misrecognise the strategic aims of Saddam Hussein ; on the other, Hussein is entirely a mercenary beholden to outside forces and it is the West which is in conflict with itself in Iraq.(3 7-8) Finally, the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait may be repre sented as the outcome of the megalomaniac ambitions of a local dictator, or as the result of a deliberate ploy on the part of the American administration in order to legitimise its projec tion of force into the region. ( 7 1 -2) The images of war nonetheless have real effects and become enmeshed in the ensuing material and social reality. In this sense, Baudrillard argues, we live in a hyperreality which results from the fusion of the virtual and the real into a third order of reality. Much has been written since the Gulf crisis about the role of the media in promoting the military option, and about the practice of misinformation, lies and propaganda on both sides. There is no doubt that such things occurred. One of the more effective propaganda stories about Iraqi atrocities in Kuwait was the eye-witness account, before a Congressional Human Rights Caucus, of Iraqi soldiers removing babies from incubators and leaving them to die. It later emerged that the 12 The Gulf War witness was the daughter of the Kuwaiti ambassador to the US. and that she had been coached by a public relations fIrm hired by the Kuwaiti Government. ll On the other side. television footage of an outraged woman amid the rubble of an Iraqi neighbourhood was later shown to have featured an Assistant Deputy Foreign Minister and former ambassador to the US.12 For some critics. such manipulation constitutes an abuse of the democratic right to information. However. the danger of a criti cal response which is confined to the denunciation of such abuses is that this also sustains what Baudrillard calls a "hypo critical vision of television and information. "(46) It judges the media by reference to a moral ideal. namely that of a good or truthful use of images and signs. In fact. there is nothing inher ently good about images or signs. and they can just as readily be employed to deceive as to tell the truth . As Baudrillard argues in his article on Timisoara. the indignant attempt to maintain a moral defence against the principle of simulation which governs all forms of representation misses the point: "the image and information are subject to no principle of truth or reality. "13 In this sense. it is cynics such as Saddam Hussein and the US military commanders who are less naive and hypo critical in their willingness to control information and images in whatever ways best serve their strategic ends: "We believe that they immorally pervert images . Not so . They alone are conscious of the profound immorality of images . . . " (47) Informational events such as the Gulf crisis are endemic to postmodern public life. Since they are by definition always open to interpretation. they may be made to serve a variety of politi cal ends. They are an important vector of power. What matters Introduction 13 is to control the production and meaning of information in a given context. In effect, at least two strategies are in play with regard to the control of information in contemporary public life. During the "live " phase of a Significant event such as the Gulf conflict or an election campaign, the strictest control of information is necessary in order to influence future develop ments. Wherever public opinion can feed back into a political process which includes the event in question, image and inter pretation or "spin" upon current developments is vital. That is why the Gulf War movie was also an influential part of history even as it unfolded. Reports before and during the conflict phase directly influenced public opinion in support of the war. Film coverage of the bombing of retreating Iraqi forces was fun damental to the decision to end the war, since it was feared that such images would adversely affect public sentiment. The images of destruction and death along the road to Basra did not fit the script of the world's first high-tech clean war. Where enemy forces are reliant upon TV news for information, as it is argued the Iraqis were during the Gulf conflict, it becomes pos sible to employ the media directly as a conduit for disinforma tion. During the preparations for the land offensive, media reports of US Marines along the Saudi border with Kuwait and on amphibious ships off the coast were part of a calculated and successful strategy to deceive Iraqi commanders about the like ly direction of the assault,14 Reports of such deliberate decep tion imply that the use of media reports as part of the Allied military's operational conduct of the war was more extensive than even Baudrillard suggests. However, once the live phase of the event is passed, another 14 The Gulf War strategy takes over. The proliferation of archival information including taped audio-visual records allows the event to become utterly dispersed into a morass of conflicting interpre tations and hypotheses about what really happene d . Did Saddam Hussein undertake the invasion of Kuwait against all indications or was he lured into a trap by US policy makers? Who was really responsible for the assassination of JFK? And who killed Laura Palmer? It is this latter effect of the prolifera tion of information which sets limits to the effectiveness of the kind of critical media analysis which seeks to discover the truth of events. The author of The Persian Gulf TV War, Douglas Kellner, recounts his herculean efforts to obtain and cross check information about the Gulf War. Despite this , his book opens with an admission of failure: he cannot decide conclu sively for or against the conspiracy theory according to which the US enticed Iraq to invade Kuwait since "other accounts are also plausible. "15 It is the desire to avoid this kind of informa tional aporia which lies behind Baudrillard's injunction: " Resist the probability of any image or information whatever. Be more virtual than the events themselves, do not seek to re-establish the truth, we do not have the means, but do not be duped, and to that end re-immerse the war and all information in the virtu ality from whence they came . . . Be meteorologically sensitive to stupidity. " (66-7) Not only does the real vanish into the virtual through an excess of information, it leaves an archival deposit such that " generations of video-zombies . . . will never cease reconstituting the event. " (47) And even if we did possess the means to establish the truth, what difference would this make? For every book exposing the Introduction 1 5 lies and inhumanity of US policy in the Gulf there are two more which champion it as the defence of democracy and the New World Order. Christopher Norris regards Baudrillard's Gulf War essays as a definitive exposure of the intellectual and political bankruptcy of postmodern thought and a demonstration of "the depth of ideological complicity that exists between such forms of extreme anti-realist or irrationalist doctrine and the crisis of moral and political nerve" which affiicts Western intellectuals. According to Norris, Baudrillard's " absurd theses" about the war readily accord with "a 'postmodern' mood of widespread cynical acqui escence " and represent a form of " theory " which is " ill equipped to mount any kind of effective critical resistance."16 Claims of ideological complicity are notoriously difficult to prove or disprove, but there is little in Baudrillard's essays to suggest acquiescence in either the political and military opera tions carried out in the Gulf or their portrayal by the media. Indeed, the tone and argument of Baudrillard' s essays is entire ly directed against the complicity which results from the failure to question the reality and the nature of these events. Norris' own rhetorical stance is one which suggests that alternative theoretical approaches offer the prospect of "effective critical resistance. " Yet Baudrillard at least published polemical pieces which addressed the political and media reality at the time. Norris seized the occasion to renew his campaign against the whole "postmodern tendency" in contemporary theory. His argument largely repeats that of his earlier article on 16 The Gulf War Baudrillard and the politics of postmodernism.17 On the one hand, he concedes the descriptive value of B audrillard ' s account, allowing that "this is indeed in some sense a 'post modern' war, an exercise in mass-manipulative rhetoric and 'hyperreal' suasive techniques, which does undoubtedly con firm some of Baudrillard' s more canny diagnostic observa tions. "18 On the other, he rejects the epistemological scepticism which he takes to lie behind this postmodern tendency, and questions the supposed connection between the diagnosis of the postmodern condition and this philosophical conclusion. The flaw which runs through all postmodernist thinking is a confused epistemological argument which begins by denying that we have any means of access to "what happens" other than what is provided by the media, and ends by concluding on this basis that there is no "operative difference between truth and falsehood, veridical knowledge and its semblance. "19 Understood in this manner, the thesis that the Gulf War did not take place would indeed be ludicrous , and would hardly justify the effort of a lengthy essay in reply. But epistemological scepticism founded upon the logic of representation is not part of Baudrillard's argument: not only does he make truth-claims about what happened, his interrogation of the reality of the media Gulf War presupposes that this is a different kind of event from those which occurred in the desert, a simulacrum rather than a distorted or misleading representation. These essays advance no universal claims about the collapse of the real into its forms of representation, but rather make specific ontological claims about aspects of present social reality, such as the virtu al war which results from the strategy of deterrence and the Introduction 17 virtual informational war which we experience through the media. At one point, it is true, Baudrillard reminds us that the direct transmission by CNN of information in real time does not prove that war is taking place.(6 1 ) However, his claim that the Gulf War did not take place does not depend upon the possibili ty of such technological fraud. Rather, it relies upon the two distinct notions of virtual war involved in deterrence and media simulation, and upon questioning whether the military opera tions undertaken by the Allies really constituted a war in the traditional sense . Useful criticism would engage with these notions rather than, as Norris does, attack a soft target of the critic's own invention. Does the refusal of the critical strategy which seeks to re-estab lish the truth of what happened commit Baudrillard to the irrationalist denial that any military engagement took place? Alternatively, does the fact of military conflict constitute a refutation of the hypothesis that there was no Gulf War? It does only if we accept that what did take place out there in the desert beyond the reach of the TV cameras was in fact a war. Baudrillard's argument in "The Gulf War did not take place" is not that nothing took place, but rather that what took place was not a war. In the past, war has always involved an antago nistic and destructive confrontation between adversaries, a dual relation between warring parties. In several respects, this was not the case in the Gulf conflict. The disparity between US and Iraqi forces with regard to method and military technology was so great that direct engagement rarely took place , and 18 The Gulf War when it did the outcome was entirely predictable. Whereas Iraq was disposed to fight in the manner of its previous war with Iran , and prepared to tolerate the massive casualties which would result from a ground-based war of attrition, the US and its allies sought a rapid conflict based upon airpower, high technology intelligence and weapons systems, and the exten sive use of electronic warfare. The almost complete absence of any engagement by Iraqi planes, and the fate of their techno logically inferior tanks, testify to the one-sided nature of the conflict: "it is as though the Iraqis were electrocuted, lobo to mised, running towards the television journalists in order to surrender or immobilised beside their tanks . . . can this be called a war?" (6 7-8) In his defence of the rationalist outlook which rej ects the postmodern reduction of truth to consensus belief, Norris points to the figure of Chomsky as someone who is both a defender of Enlightenment ideals in morality and the philoso phy of language, and a staunch critic of US foreign policy, a model of the liberal and critical intellectual. Yet Chomsky has also questioned whether what took place in the Gulf in 19 9 0-1 was a war. He writes: "As I understand the concept 'war' , it involves two sides in combat, say, shooting at each other. That did not happen in the Gulf. "2o He goes on to describe the suc cessive phases of the conflict as involving varieties of state ter rorism practised on both sides, and a form of slaughter prac tised by US and UK air and ground forces upon Iraqi soldiers and civilians. Other commentators have argued that the dis parity between the aims, methods and military technology of the two sides was so great that what occurred cannot be con- Introduction 1 9 sidered an adversarial encounter. The imbalance of military means was such that this was not a conflict in which the sur vival of both sides was in play, but an entirely asymmetrical operation, an exercise in domination rather than an act of war. The claim that war itself has become virtual does not mean that military conflicts do not occur: they do and with increas ing frequency and savagery in the New World Order. But these are secondary phenomena, like the persistence of sweatshops alongside fully automated production facilities. They are the consequences of a law of uneven development, located for the most part in a political and military third world. Where they do involve first world powers such as the US or UK, it is because they are in conflict wlth third world forces who do not recog nise that the rules of the game have changed, or who, like Saddam Hussein, operate according to different rules. They are police operations rather than wars. In these cases, deterrence breaks down for lack of any common ground, and it is this fail ure of communication which leads to the use of force. However, the use of force remains carefully circumscribed, a lever of last resort employed only to the extent that is necessary to bring the recalcitrant party into line. The crucial stake in the Gulf affair, Baudrillard argues, was the subordination of Islam to the glob al order: "Our wars thus have less to do with the confrontation of warriors than with the domestication of the refractory forces on the planet . . . All that is singular and irreducible must be reduced and absorbed. This is the law of democracy and the New World Order. " (86) This is not war, and even if it were, in the case of the Gulf conflict, it is as though it never happened. The final irony of the 20 The Gulf War whole episode is that. apart from the massive damage and suf fering inflicted upon Iraq. and the short-lived political and eco nomic benefits at home. very little changed as a result of the military conflict. The Iraqi regime was allowed to remain intact. and its army permitted to crush the Kurdish and Shiite rebellions. The rights of Kuwait may have been restored. but in exchange for the rights of minorities in Iraq. The image of a just war fought between the forces of freedom and those of tyranny dissolved in the moral ambiguities of the post-conflict period. The same Americans who had systematically destroyed Iraq's power grid and transport infrastructure now refused to enforce the law of democracy and the New World Order where this would entail intervening in the internal affairs of a sovereign state. From a political point of view. it was no longer clear what had been gained by the sacrifice of so many lives. A perfect semblance of victory for the Americans was exchanged for the perfect semblance of defeat for Iraq. ( 7 1 ) In short. the Gulf War did not take place. Several people answered my queries. discussed the text and read drafts of this translation. In addition to Jean Baudrillard. I would like to thank Rex Butler. Alan Cholodenko . Michael McKinley and Larbi Sadiki for their valuable assistance. I am especially grateful to Julian Pefanis and Jose Borghino for their careful checking and editing of the translation. Introduction 2 1 Notes 1 Jean Baudrillard,La Guerre du Golfe n'a pas eu lieu, Paris: Editions Galilee, 1991. All subsequent references to this text in the Introduction refer to the translation which follows. 2 George Gerbner, "Persian Gulf War,the Movie" in Triumph of the Image: The Media's War in the Persian Gulf- A Global Perspective, edited by H. Mowlana, G. Gerbner andH.1. Schiller,Boulder and Oxford: Westview Press,1992,p.252. 3 Gerbner,pp.244,247. 4 Baudrillard,Selected Writings, ed Mark Poster,Cambridge: Polity Press, 1988,p.166. 5 Michael Heim, The Metaphysics of Vi rtuaI Reality, New York,Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993,p.113. 6 Bruce Sterling, "War is VirtuaIHell", Wired (1),1993,pp.95-6. 7 Lieutenant-Colonel Jeffrey D. McCausland,Adelphi Paper 282, London: The International Institute for Strategic Studies,1993,p.29. 8 Baudrillard Live: Selected Interviews, ed Mike Gane,London and New York, Routledge, pp.180-1. 203. 9 "Les charniers de Timisoara",in J. Baudrillard,L'lliusion de lafin ou la greve des evenements, Paris: Editions Galilee, 1993; "Pas de pitie pour Sarajevo" , Liberation, 7 January 1994. 10 Baudrillard,L'illusion de lajin, p.95. 11 Douglas Kellner, The Persian Gulf TV War, Boulder: Westview Press,1992, pp.67-8. 12 McCausland,Adelphi Paper 282, p.32. 13 Baudrillard,L'illusion de lajin, p.90. 14 William J. Taylor Jr and James Blackwell, "The Ground War in the Gulr', Survival, vol. XXXIII, no.3,May/June 1991, p.234. 15 Kellner, The Persian Gulf TV War, pp.7,13. 16 Christopher Norris, Uncritical Theory: Postmodernism, Intellectuals and the Gulf War, London: Lawrence and Wishart,1992,pp.27,29. 17 Norris, "Lost in the Funhouse: Baudrillard and the politics of postmod emism",in What's Wrong With Postmodernism, HemelHempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf,1990,pp.164-93. 18 Norris, Uncritical Theory pp.25-6. 19 Norris, Uncritical Theory p.12. 20 Noam Chomsky, "The Media and the War: What War?",in Triumph of the Image: The Media's War in the Persian Gulf-A Global Perspective, edited by H. Mowlana,G. Gerbner andH.I. Schiller,p.51.  The Gulf War will not tal(e place From the beginning, we knew that this war would never hap pen. After the hot war (the violence of conflict) , after the cold war (the balance of terror) . here comes the dead war - the unfrozen cold war - which leaves us to grapple with the corpse of war and the necessity of dealing with this decompos ing corpse which nobody from the Gulf has managed to revive. America, Saddam Hussein and the Gulf powers are fighting over the corpse of war. War has entered into a definitive crisis. It is too late for the (hot) WW III: this has already taken place, distilled down the years into the Cold War. There will be no other. It might have been supposed that the defection of the Eastern Bloc would have opened up new spaces of freedom for war by unlocking deterrence. Nothing of the sort. since deterrence has not come to an end, on the contrary. In the past it functioned as recipro cal deterrence between the two blocs on the basis of a virtual excess of the means of destruction. Today it functions all the 24 The Gulf War more effectively as self-deterrence, total self-deterrence up to and including the self-dissolution of the Eastern Bloc, the pro found self-deterrence of American power and of Western power in general. paralysed by its own strength and incapable of assuming it in the form of relations of force. This is why the Gulf War will not take place. It is neither reassuring nor comforting that it has become bogged in inter minable suspense. In this sense, the gravity of the non-event in the Gulf is even greater than the event of war: it corresponds to the highly toxic period which affects a rotting corpse and which can cause nausea and powerless stupor. Here again, our sym bolic defences are weak: the mastery of the end of war escapes us and we live all this in a uniform shameful indifference, just like the hostages. Non-war is characterised by that degenerate form of war which i n c ludes h o s t age manipulation and n e g o t i a t i o n . Hostages and blackmail are the purest products o f deterrence. The hostage has taken the place of the warrior. He has become the principal actor, the simulacral protagonist, or rather, in his pure inaction, the protagoniser of non-war. The warriors bury themselves in the desert leaving only hostages to occupy the stage, including all of us as information hostages on the world media stage. The hostage is the phantom actor, the extra who occupies the powerless stage of war. Today, it is the hostage at the strategic site, tomorrow the hostage as Christmas present, as exchange value and liquidity. Fantastic degradation of that which was the very fi gure of impossible exchange. With Saddam Hussein, even that strong value has weakened and become the symbol of weak war. Saddam has made himself the will not take place 25 capitalist of hostage value; after the market in slaves and prole tarians, the vulgar merchant of the hostage market. Taking the place of the warrior's challenge, hostage value has become syn onymous with the debility of war. We are all hostages of media intoxication, induced to believe in the war just as we were once led to believe in the revolution in Romania, and confined to the simulacrum of war as though confined to quarters. We are already all strategic hostages in situ; our site is the screen on which we are virtually bombarded day by day, even while serv ing as exchange value. In this sense, the grotesque vaudeville played by Saddam Hussein is a diversion, at once a diversion of both war and international terrorism. His soft terrorism will at least have put an end to the hard terrorism of Palestinians and others, thereby showing him to be in this as in many other respects the perfect accomplice of the West. This impossibility of proceeding to the act, this absence of strategy, implies the triumph of blackmail as strategy (in the case of Iran, there was still a challenge; with Saddam there is only blackmail). Saddam Hussein's abjection lies in his having vulgarised everything : religiOUS challenge has become fake holy war, the sacrificial hostage a commercial hostage, the vio lent refusal of the West a nationalistic scam and war an impos sible comedy. But we have helped him to do this. By allowing him to believe that he had won the war against Iran, we drove him towards the mirage of a victory against the West - this mercenary's revolt is indeed the only ironic and pleasing trait of this whole story. 26 The Gulf War We are in neither a logic of war nor a logic of peace but in a logic of deterrence which has wound its way inexorably through forty years of cold war to a denouement in our cur rent events ; a logic of weak events, to which belong those in Eastern Europe as well as the Gulf War. Peripeteias of an anorexic history or an anorexic war which can no longer devour the enemy because it is incapable of conceiving the enemy as worthy of being challenged or annihilated - and God knows Saddam Hussein is worthy of neither challenge nor annihilation - and thus devours itself. It is the de-intensified state of war, that of the right to war under the green light of the UN and with an abundance of precautions and conces sions. It is the bellicose equivalent of safe sex: make war like love with a condom I On the Richter scale, the Gulf War would not even reach two or three. The build-up is unreal, as though the fiction of an earthquake were created by manipulating the measuring instruments. It is neither the strong form nor the degree zero of war, but the weak or phthisical degree, the asymp totic form which allows a brush with war but no encounter, the transparent degree which allows war to be seen from the depths of the darkroom. We should have been suspicious about the disappearance of the declaration of war, the disappearance of the symbolic passage to the act, which already presaged the disappearance of the end of hostilities, then of the distinction between win ners and losers (the winner readily becomes the hostage of the loser: the Stockholm syndrome ) , then of operations them selves. Since it never began, this war is therefore interminable. By dint of dreaming of pure war, of an orbital war purged of all wil l not take place 27 local and political peripeteias, we have fallen into soft war, into the virtual impossibility of war which translates into the paltry fantasia where adversaries compete in de-escalation, as though the irruption or the event of war had become obscene and insupportable, no longer sustainable, like every real event moreover. Everything is therefore transposed into the virtual, and we are confronted with a virtual apocalypse, a hegemony ultimately much more dangerous than real apocalypse. The most widespread belief is in a logical progression from virtual to actual, according to which no available weapon will not one day be used and such a concentration of force cannot but lead to conflict . However , this is an Aristotelian logic which is no longer our own. Our virtual has definitively over taken the actual and we must be content with this extreme virtuality which, unlike the Aristotelian, deters any passage to action. We are no longer in a logic of the passage from virtual to actual but in a hyperrealist logic of the deterrence of the real by the virtual. In this process , the hostages are once again revealing. Extracted like molecules in an experimental process, then dis tilled one by one in the exchange, it is their virtual death that is at issue, not their real death. Moreover, they never die: at best they disappear. There will never be a monument to the unknown hostage, everyone is too ashamed of him: the collec tive shame which attaches to the hostage reflects the absolute degradation of real hostility (war) into virtual hospitality (Saddam Hussein's " guests "). The passage to action suffers widespread infamy: it suppos edly corresponds to a brutal lifting of repression, thus to a psy- 28 The Gulf War chotic process. It seems that this obsession with the passage to action today governs all our behaviour: obsession with every real, with every real event, with every real violence, with every pleasure which is too real. Against this obsession with the real we have created a gigantic apparatus of simulation which allows us to pass to the act "in vitro " (this is true even of pro creation). We prefer the exile of the virtual, of which television is the universal mirror, to the catastrophe of the real. War has not escaped this virtualisation which is like a sur gical operation, the aim of which is to present a face-lifted war, the cosmetically treated spectre of its death, and its even more deceptive televisual subterfuge (as we saw at Timisoara). Even the military has lost the privilege of use value, the privilege of real war. Deterrence has passed by that way and it spares no one. No more than the politicians, the military personnel do not know what to make of their real function, their function of death and destruction. They are pledged to the decoy of war as the others are to the decoy of power. PS To demonstrate the impossibility of war just at the moment when it must take place, when the signs of its occurrence are accumulating, is a stupid gamble. But it would have been even more stupid not to seize the opportunity. The Gulf War: is it really taking place? We may well ask. On the available evidence (absence of images and profusion of commentary) , we could suppose an immense promotional exercise like that one which once advertised a brand-name (GARAP) whose product never became known. Pure promotion which enjoyed an immense success because it belonged to pure speculation. The war is also pure and speculative, to the extent that we do not see the real event that it could be or that it would Signify. It reminds us of that recent suspense advertisement: today I take offthe top, tomorrow I take off the bottom; today I unleash virtual war, tomorrow I unleash real war. In the background, a third advertisement in which an avaricious and lubricious banker says: your money appeals to me. This sadly celebrated advertisement is reincarnated by Saddam Hussein saying to the West: your power appeals to me (as they rushed to palm off a good share of it to him ) ; then to the Arabs, with the same hypocrisy: your religious war appeals to me (as they rushed to 30 The Gulf War: put all their money on him) . In this manner, the war makes its way by promotion and speculation, including the use of hostages transformed into marketing ploys, and in the absence of any clarification of plans, balance sheets, losses or operations. No enterprise would survive such uncertainty, except precisely speculative risk management, otherwise known as the strategy of turning a profit from the worst, in other words, war (= Highly Profitable Senseless Project or HPSP) . War itself has taken this specula tive turn: it is highly profitable but uncertain. It can collapse from one day to the next. Nevertheless, from this point onwards the promotional advantages are fabulous . Defeated or not, Saddam is assured of an unforgettable and charismatic label. Victorious or not, American armaments will have acquired an unequalled tech nological label. And the sumptuary expenditure in material is already equivalent to that of a real war, even if it has not taken place. We have still not left the virtual war, in other words a sophisticated although often laughable build-up against the backdrop of a global indeterminacy of will to make war, even in Saddam's case. Hence the absence of images - which is nei ther accidental nor due to censorship but to the impossibility of illustrating this indeterminacy of the war. Promotional, speculative, virtual: this war no longer corre sponds to Clausewitz' s formula of politics pursued by other means, it rather amounts to the absence of politics pursued by other m eans. Non-war is a terrible test of the status and the uncertainty of politics, just as a stock market crash (the specu- is it really taking place? 31 lative universe) is a crucial test of the economy and of the uncertainty of economic aims, just as any event whatever is a terrible test of the uncertainty and the aims of information. Thus "real time" information loses itself in a completely unreal space, finally furnishing the images of pure, useless, instanta neous television where its primordial function irrupts, namely that of filling a vacuum, blocking up the screen hole through which escapes the substance of events. Nor is promotion the pursuit of the economy by other means. On the contrary, it is the pure product of uncertainty with regard to the rational aims of production. This is why it has become a relentless function, the emptiness of which fills our screens to the extent of the absence of any economic finali ty or rationality. This is why it competes victoriously with the war on our screens, both alternating in the same virtual credit of the image. The media promote the war, the war promotes the media, and advertising competes with the war. Promotion is the most thick-skinned parasite in our culture. It would undoubtedly survive a nuclear conflict. It is our Last Judgement. But it is also like a biological function: it devours our substance, but it also allows us to metabolise what we absorb, like a parasitic plant or intestinal flora, it allows us to turn the world and the violence of the world into a consumable substance. So, war or promotion? The war, along with the fake and presumptive warriors , generals, experts and television presenters we see speculating about it all through the day, watches itself in a mirror: am I pretty enough, am I operational enough, am I spectacular 32 The Gulf War: enough. am I sophisticated enough to make an entry onto the historical stage? Of course. this anxious interrogation increases the uncertainty with respect to its possible irruption. And this uncertainty invades our screens like a real oil slick. in the image of that blind sea bird stranded on a beach in the Gulf. which will remain the symbol-image of what we all are in front of our screens. in front of that sticky and unintelligible event. Unlike earlier wars. in which there were political aims either of conquest or domination . what is at stake in this one is war itself: its status. its meaning. its future. It is beholden not to have an objective but to prove its very existence (this crisis of identity affects the existence of us all) . In effect. it has lost much of its credibility. Who. apart from the Arab masses. is still capa ble of believing in it and becoming inflamed by it? Nevertheless. the spectacular drive of war remains intact. In the absence of the (greatly diminished) will to power. and the (problematic) will to knowledge. there remains today the widespread will to spectacle. and with it the obstinate desire to preserve its spectre or fiction (this is the fate of religions: they are no longer believed. but the disincarnate practice remains). Can war still be saved? Certainly. Iran and Iraq did as much as they could to save the fiction of murderous. fratricidal. sacrificial and interminable ( 1 9 1 4 style) war. But they were savages and that war from another period proved nothing with regard to the status and is it really taking place? 33 the possibility of a modern war. WW III did not take place and yet we are already beyond it. as though in the utopian space of a post-war-which-did-not-take-place. and it is in the suspense created by this non-place that the present confrontations unfold and the question is posed: can a war still take place? This one is perhaps only a test. a desperate attempt to see whether war is still possible. Empty war: it brings to mind those games in World Cup football which often had to be decided by penalties (sorry spectacle). because of the impossibility of forcing a decision. As though the players punished themselves by means of "penalties" for not having been able to play and take the match in full battle. We might as well have begun with the penalties and dispensed with the game and its sterile stand-ofT. So with the war: it could have begun at the end and spared us the forced spectacle of this unreal war where nothing is extreme and which. whatever the outcome. will leave behind the smell of undigested program ming. and the entire world irritated as though after an unsuc cessful copulation. It is a war of excesses (of means. of material, etc . ) . a war of shedding or purging stocks. of experimental deployment. of liq uidation and firesale. along with the display of future ranges of weaponry. A war between excessive. superabundant and over equipped societies (Iraq included). committed both to waste (including human waste) and the necessity of getting rid of it. 34 The Gulf War: Just as the waste of time nourishes the hell of leisure. so techno logical wastes nourish the hell of war. Wastes which incarnate the secret violence of this society. uncoerced and non-degrad able defecation. The renowned American stocks of WW II sur plus. which appeared to us as luxury. have become a suffocat ing global burden. and war functions well within its possibili ties in this role of purgative and expenditure. If the critical intellectual is in the process of disappearing. it seems by contrast that his phobia of the real and of action has been distilled throughout the sanguineous and cerebral net work of our institutions. In this sense, the entire world includ ing the military is caught up in a process of intellectualisation. See them become confused in explanations , outdo them selves in j ustifications and lose themselves in technical details (war drifts slowly into technological mannerism) or in the deontology of a pure electronic war without hitches: these are aesthetes speaking . postponing settlement dates into the interminable and decisions into the undecidable. Their war processors. their radars. their lasers and their screens render the passage to war as futile and impossible as the use of a word-processor renders futile and impossible the passage to the act of writing. because it removes from it in advance any dramatic uncertainty. The generals also exhaust their artificial intelligence in cor recting their scenario. polishing their war script so much that they sometimes make errors of manipulation and lose the plot. The famous philosophical epoche has become universal. on the is it really taking place? 35 screens as much as on the field of battle. Should we applaud the fact that all these techniques of war processing culminate in the elision of the duration and the vio lence of war? Only eventually, for the indefinite delay of the war is itself heavy with deadly consequences in all domains. By virtue of having been anticipated in all its details and exhausted by all the scenarios, this war ends up resembling the hero of Italien des Roses (Richard Bohringer in the film by Charles Matton), who hesitates to dive from the top of a build ing for an hour and a half, before a crowd at first hanging on his movements, then disappointed and overcome by the sus pense, exactly as we are today by the media blackmail and the illusion of war. It is as though it had taken place ten times already: why would we want it to take place again? It is the same in ltalien des Roses : we know that his imaginary credit is exhausted and that he will not jump, and in the end nobody gives a damn whether he jumps or not because the real event is already left behind. This is the problem with anticipation. Is there still a chance that something which has been meticulously programmed will occur? Does a truth which has been meticulously demonstrated still have a chance of being true? When too many things point in the same direction, when the objective reasons pile up, the effect is reversed. Thus everything which points to war is ambiguous: the build-up of force, the play of tension, the con centration of weapons, even the green light from the UN. Far from reinforcing the probability of the conflict, these function 36 The Gulf War: as a preventative accumulation, as a substitution for and diver sion from the transition to war. Virtual for five months, the war will shortly enter its terminal phase, according to the rule which says that what never began ends without having taken place. The profound indeterminacy of this war stems from the fact of its being both terminated in advance and interminable. The virtual succeeds itself - acci dents aside, which could only be the irruption of the other in the field. But no-one wants to hear talk of the other. Ultimately, the undecidability of the war is grounded in the disappearance of alterity, of primitive hostility, and of the enemy. War has become a celibate machine. Thanks to this war, the extraordinary confusion in the Arab world is in the process of infecting the West - just revenge. In return, we try desperately to unify and stabilise them in order to exercise better control. It is an historic arm-wrestle: who will stabilise the other before being destabilised themselves ? Confronted by the virulent and un graspable instability of the Arabs and of Islam, whose defence is that of the hysteriC in all his versatility, the West is in the process of demonstrating that its values can no longer lay claim to any universality than that (extremely fragile) of the UN. Faced with the Western logic of under-compensation (the West tends towards the euphemisation and even the inhibition of its power) , the Oriental logic of Saddam responds with over- is it really taking place? 37 compensati o n . Although far from having proved himself against Iran, he attacks the West. He operates beyond the reach of his own forces, there where only God can help him. He undertakes an act of magical provocation and it is left to God, or some other predestined connection, to do the rest (this was in principle the role allotted to the Arab masses). By contrast, through a kind of egocentric generosity or stu pidity, the Americans can only imagine and combat an enemy in their own image. They are at once both missionaries and converts of their own way of life, which they triumphally pro ject onto the world. They cannot imagine the Other, nor there fore personally make war upon it. What they make war upon is the alterity of the other, and what they want is to reduce that alterity, to convert it or failing that to annihilate it if it proves irreducible (the Indians). They cannot imagine that conversion and repentance, borne by their own good will, should have no echo in the other, and they are literally disturbed when they see Saddam playing with them and refusing to accede to their reasons. This is perhaps why they have decided to annihilate him, not out of hatred or calculation, but for the crime of felony, treachery, malevolent will and trickery (exactly as with the Indians). For their part, the Israelis have no such tenderness. They see the Other in all its bare adversity without illusions or scru ples. The Other, the Arab, is unconvertible, his alterity is with out appeal; it must not be changed, it must be beaten down and subjugated. In doing so, however, while they may not under stand they at least recognise it. The Americans, for their part, understand nothing and do not even recognise this fact. 38 The Gulf War: It is not an important match which is being played out in the Gulf, between Western hegemony and the challenge from the rest of the world. It is the West in conflict with itself, by means of an interposed mercenary, after having been in conflict with Islam (Iran) , also by means of an interposed Saddam. Saddam remains the fake enemy. At first the champion of the West against Islam, then the champion of Islam against the West. In both cases he is a traitor to his own cause since, even more than the few thousand incidental Westerners , it is the Arab masses that he holds hostage, captures for his own profit and immobilises in their suicidal enthusiasm . It is moreover towards Christmas, at the very moment when he frees the hostages (thereby skilfully stroking the Westerners with the same demagogy that he strokes the children in front of the TV) , that h e launches his call t o the Arab people o n the holy war. It is thus a mistake to think that he would contribute to the unification of the Arab world and to honour him for that. In fact, he only did it to hoodwink them, to make them work for him, to deceive them once again and to render them powerless. People like him are necessary from time to time in order to channel irruptive forces. They serve as a poultice or an artifical purgative. It is a form of deterrence, certainly a Western strate gy, but one of which Saddam, in his pride and his stupidity, is a perfect executant. He who loves decoys so much is himself no more than a decoy and his elimination can only demystify this war by putting an end to that objective complicity which itself is no decoy. But, for this very reason, is the West determined to elimi nate him? is it really taking place? 39 The exhibition of American prisoners on Iraqi TV. Once more the politics of blackmail , of hostages, the humiliation of the USA by the spectacle of those "repentants" forced to avow sym bolically American dishonour. Our own as well, we whom the screens submit to the s ame violence , that of the battere d , manipulated and powerless prisoner, that o f forced voyeurism in response to the forced exhibitionism of the images. Along with the spectacle of these prisoners or these hostages , the screens offer us the spectacle of our powerlessness . In a case such as this, information exactly fulfills its role which is to con vince us of our own abjection by the obscenity of what is seen. The forced perversion of the look amounts to the avowal of our own dishonour, and makes repentants of us as well. That the Americans should have allowed themselves to be ridiculed without departing from their own program and war indicates a weakness in their symbolic detonator. Humiliation remains the worst kind of test, arrogance (Saddam's) the worst kind of conduct, blackmail the worst kind of relationship and the acceptance of blackmail the worst kind of dishonour. The fact that this symbolic violence, worse than any sexual vio lence, should finally have been withstood without flinching testifies to the depth or the unconscious character of Western masochism. This is the rule of the American way of life : nothing personal! A n d they make war in the same manner: pragmatically and not symbolically. They thereby expose themselves to deadly situations which they are unable to con front. But perhaps they accept this in expiation of their power, in an equivalence which is after all symbolic? 40 The Gulf War: Two intense images. two or perhaps three scenes which all con cern disfigured forms or costumes which correspond to the masquerade of this war: the CNN j ournalists with their gas masks in the Jerusalem studios; the drugged and beaten prison ers repenting on the screen of Iraqi TV; and perhaps that sea bird covered in oil and pointing its blind eyes towards the Gulf sky. It is a masquerade of information: branded faces delivered over to the prostitution of the image. the image of an unintelli gible distress . No images of the field of battle. but images of masks. of blind or defeated faces. images of falsification. It is not war taking place over there but the disfiguration of the world. There is a profound scorn in the kind of "clean " war which ren ders the other powerless without destroying its flesh. which makes it a point of honour to disarm and neutralise but not to kill. In a sense. it is worse than the other kind of war because it spares life. It is like humiliation: by taking less than life it is worse than taking life. There is undoubtedly a political error here. in so far as it is acceptable to be defeated but not to be put out of action. In this manner. the Americans inflict a particular insult by not making war on the other but simply eliminating him. the same as one would by not bargaining over the price of an object and thereby refusing any personal relationship with the vendor. The one whose price you accept without discussion despises you. The one whom you disarm without seeing is insulted and must be avenged. There is perhaps something of this in the presentation of those humiliated captives on televi sion. It is in a sense to say to America: you who do not wish to is it really taking place? 41 see us, we will show you what you are like. Just as the psychical or the screen of the psyche transforms every illness into a symptom (there is no organic illness which does not find its meaning elsewhere, in an interpretation of the ailment on another level: all the symptoms pass through a sort of black box in which the psychic images are j umbled and inverted, the illness becomes reversible, ungraspable, escaping any form of realistic medicine) , so war, when it has been turned into information, ceases to be a realistic war and becomes a vir tual war, in some way symptomatic. And just as everything psychical becomes the object of interminable speculation, so everything which is turned into information becomes the object of endless speculation, the site of total uncertainty. We are left with the symptomatic reading on our screens of the effects of the war, or the effects of discourse about the war, or completely speculative strategic evaluations which are analo gous to those evaluations of opinion provided by polls. In this manner, we have gone in a week from 2 0% to 5 0% and then to 30% destruction of Iraqi military potential. The figure fluctu ates exactly like the fortunes of the stock market. "The land offensive is anticipated today, tomorrow, in a few hours, in any case sometime this week . . . the climatic conditions are ideal for a confrontation, etc . " Whom to believe? There is nothing to believe. We must learn to read symptoms as symptoms, and television as the hysterical symptom of a war which has noth ing to do with its critical mass. Moreover, it does not seem to have to reach its critical mass but remains in its inertial phase, 42 The Gulf War: while the implosion of the apparatus of information along with the accompanying tendency of the rate of information to fall seems to reinforce the implosion of war itself, with its accompa nying tendency of the rate of confrontation to fall. Information is like an unintelligent missile which never finds its target (n r, unfortunately, its anti-missile ! } , and therefore crashes anywhere or gets lost in space on an unpredictable orbit in which it eternally revolves as junk. Information is only ever an erratic missile with a fuzzy desti nation which seeks its target but is drawn to every decoy - it is itself a decoy, in fact it scatters all over the environs and the result is mostly nil. The utopia of a targetted promotion or tar getted information is the same as that of the targetted missile: it knows not where it lands and perhaps its mission is not to land but, like the missile, essentially to have been launched (as its name indicates). In fact, the only impressive images of missiles, rockets or satellites are those of the launch. It is the same with promotions or five year plans: the campaign launch is what counts, the impact or the end results are so uncertain that one frequently hears no more about them. The entire effect is in the programming, the success is that of the virtual model. Consider the Scuds: their strategic effectiveness is nil and their only (psy chological) effect lies in the fact that Saddam succeeded in launching them. The fac t that the production of decoys has become an important branch of the war industry, just as the production of placebos has become an important branch of the medical is it really taking place? 43 industry and forgery a flourishing branch of the art industry - not to mention the fact that information has become a privi leged branch of industry as such - all of this is a sign that we have entered a deceptive world in which an entire culture labours assiduously at its counterfeit. This also means that it no longer harbours any illusion about itself. It all began with the leitmotif of precision, of surgical, mathe matical and punctual efficacy, which is another way of not recognising the enemy as such, just as lobotomy is a way of not recognising madness as such. And then all that technical virtu osity finished up in the most ridiculous uncertainty. The isola tion of the enemy by all kinds of electronic interference creates a sort of barricade behind which he becomes invisible. He also becomes "stealthy, " and his capacity for resistance becomes indeterminable. In annihilating hi  at a distance and as it were by transparen c y , it becomes impossible t o discern whether or not he is dead. The idea of a clean war, like that of a clean bomb or an intelli gent missile, this whole war conceived as a technological extrapolation of the brain is a sure sign of madness. It is like those characters in Hieronymus Bosch with a glass bell or a soap bubble around their head as a sign of their mental debility. A war enclosed in a glass coffin, like Snow White, purged of any carnal contamination or warrior's passion. A clean war which ends up in an oil slick. 44 The Gulf War: The French supplied the planes and the nuclear power stations, the Russians the tanks, the English the underground bunkers and runways, the Germans the gas, the Dutch the gas masks, while the Italians supplied the decoy equivalents of everything - tanks, bunkers, inflatable bombers, missiles with artificial thermal emissions, etc. Before so many marvels, one is drawn to compete in diabolical imagination: why not false gas masks for the Palestinians? Why not put the hostages at decoy strate gic sites, a fake chemical factory for example? Has a French plane been downed? The question becomes burn ing, it is our honour which is at stake. That would constitute a proof of our involvement, and the Iraqis appear to take a mali cious pleasure in denying it (perhaps they have a more accu rate idea of our involvement?). Whatever the situation, it will be necessary here too to set up decoys, simulated losses and trompe l 'oeil victims (as with the fake destruction of civic build ings in Timisoara or Baghdad). A war of high technological concentration but poor definition. Perhaps it has gone beyond its critical mass by too strong a concentration? Fine illustration of the communication schema in which emitter and receiver on opposite sides of the screen, never con nect with each other. Instead of messages, it is missiles and bombs which fly from one side to the other, but any dual or per sonal relation is altogether absent. Thus an aerial attack on is it really taking place? 45 Iraq may be read in terms of coding, decoding and feedback (in this case, very b a d : we cannot even know what we h ave destroyed). This explains the tolerance of the Israelis: they have only been hit by abstract projectiles, namely missiles. The least live bombing attack on Israel would have provoked immediate retaliation. Communication is also a clean relation: in principle, it excludes any violent or personal affect. It is strange to see this disaffection, this profound indifference to one another, played out at the very heart of violence and war. The fact that the undetectable Stealth bombers should have begun the war by aiming at decoys and undoubtedly destroying fake objectives, that the Secret Services (also "furtive") should have been so mistaken in so many ways about the realities of Iraqi weaponry, and the strategists so wrong about the effects of the intensive electronic war, all testifies to the illusionism of force once it is no longer measured against an adversary but against its abstract operation alone. All the generals, admirals and other meretricious experts should be sent to an inflatable strategic site , to see whether these decoys wouldn ' t in fact attract a real bomb on their heads. Conversely, the Americans ' innocence in admitting their mistake (declaring five months later that the Iraqi forces are almost intact while they themselves are not ready to attack) and all that counter-propaganda which adds to the confusion would be moving if it did not testify to the same strategic idiocy as the triumphal declarations at the outset, and did not further 46 The Gulf War: take us for complicit witnesses of this suspicious sincerity of the kind which says: you see , we tell you everything. We can always give credit to the Americans for knowing how to exploit their failures by means of a sort of trompe l'oeil candour. A UN bedtime story: the UN awoke (or was awakened) from its glass coffin (the building in New York) . As the coffin fell and was shattered (at the same time as the Eastern Bloc), she spat out the apple and revived, as fresh as a rose, only to find at once the waiting Prince Charming: the Gulf War, also fresh from the arms of the cold war after a long period of mourning. No doubt together they will give birth to a New World Order, or else end up like two ghosts locked in vampiric embrace. Seeing how Saddam uses his cameras on the hostages , the caressed children, the (fake) strategic targets, on his own smil ing face, on the ruins of the milk factory, one cannot help thinking that in the West we still have a hypocritical vision of television and information, to the extent that, despite all the evidence, we hope for their proper use. Saddam, for his part, knows what the media and information are: he makes a radi cal, unconditional, perfectly cynical and therefore perfectly instrumental use of them. The Romanians too were able to make a perfectly immoral and mystificatory use of them (from our point of view) . We may regret this, but given the principle of simulation which governs all information, even the most pious and obj ective , and given the structural unreality of is it really taking place? 47 images and their proud indifference to the truth, these cynics alone are right about information when they employ it as an unconditional simulacrum. We believe that they immorally pervert images. Not so. They alone are conscious of the pro found immorality of images, j ust as the Bokassas and Amin Dadas reveal, through the parodic and Ubuesque use they make of them, the obscene truth of the Western political and democratic structures they borrowed. The secret of the under developed is to parody their model and render it ridiculous by exaggeration. We alone retain the illusion of information and of a right to information. They are not so naive. Never any acting out, or passage to action, but simply acting: roll cameras! But there is too much fIlm, or none at all, or it was desensitised by remaining too long in the humidity of the cold war. In short, there is quite simply nothing to see. Later, there will be something to see for the viewers of archival cassettes and the generations of video-zombies who will never cease reconstituting the event, never having had the intuition of the non-event of this war. The archive also belongs to virtual time; it is the comple ment of the event "in real time, " of that instantaneity of the event and its diffusion. Moreover, rather than the "revolution" of real time of which Virilio speaks, we should speak of an in vo lution in real time; of an involution of the event in the instanta neity of everything at once, and of its vanishing in information itself. If we take note of the speed of light and the temporal short-circuit of pure war (the nanosecond) , we see that this 48 The Gulf War: involution precipitates us precisely into the virtuality of war and not into its reality, it precipitates us into the absence of war. Must we denounce the speed of light? Utopia of real time which renders the event simultaneous at all points on the globe. In fact, what we live in real time is not the event, but rather in larger than life (in other words, in the vir tual size of the image) the spectacle of the degradation of the event and its spectral evocation (the "spiritualism of informa tion" : event, are you there? Gulf War, are you there?) in the commentary, gloss, and verbose mise en scene of talking heads which only underlines the impossibility of the image and the correlative unreality of the war. It is the same aporia as that of cinema verite which seeks to short-circuit the unreality of the image in order to present us the truth of the object. In this man ner, CNN seeks to be a stethoscope attached to the hypothetical heart of the war, and to present us with its hypothetical pulse. But this auscultation only provides a confused ultrasound, undecidable symptoms, and an assortment of vague and con tradictory diagnoses. All that we can hope for is to see them die live (metaphorically of course), in other words that some event or other should overwhelm the information instead of the infor mation inventing the event and commenting artificially upon it. The only real information revolution would be this one, but it is not likely to occur in the near future: it would presuppose a reversal of the idea we have of information. In the meantime, we will continue with the involution and encrustation of the event in and by information, and the closer we approach the is it real ly taking place? 49 live and real time, the further we will go in this direction. The same illusion of progress occurred with the appearance of speech and then colour on screen : at each stage of this progress we moved further away from the imaginary intensity of the image. The closer we supposedly approach the real or the truth, the further we draw away from them both, since neither one nor the other exists. The closer we approach the real time of the event, the more we fall into the illusion of the virtual. God save us from the illusion of war. At a certain speed, the speed of light, you lose even your shad ow. At a certain speed, the speed of information, things lose their sense. There is a great risk of announcing (or denouncing) the Apocalypse of real time, when it is precisely at this point that the event volatilises and becomes a black hole from which light no longer escapes. War implodes in real time, history implodes in real time, all communication and all signification implode in real time. The Apocalypse itself, understood as the arrival of cat astrophe, is unlikely. It falls prey to the prophetic illusion. The world is not sufficiently coherent to lead to the Apocalypse. Nevertheless, in confronting our opinions on the war with the diametrically opposed opinions of Paul Virilio, one of us bet ting on apocalyptic escalation and the other on deterrence and the indefmite virtuality of war, we concluded that this decided ly strange war went in both directions at once. The war's pro grammed escalation is relentless and its non-occurrence no less inevitable: the war proceeds at once towards the two extremes of intensification and deterrence. The war and the non-war 50 The Gulf War: take place at the same time, with the same period of deploy ment and suspense and the same possibilities of de-escalation or maximal increase. What is most extraordinary is that the two hypotheses, the apocalypse of real time and pure war along with the triumph of the virtual over the real, are realised at the same time, in the same space-time, each in implacable pursuit of the other. It is a sign that the space of the event has become a hyperspace with multiple refractivity, and that the space of war has become defini tively non-Euclidean. And that there will undoubtedly be no res olution of this situation: we will remain in the undecidability of war, which is the undecidability created by the unleashing of the two opposed principles. Soft war and pure war go boating. There is a degree of popular good will in the micro-panic dis tilled by the airwaves . The public ultimately consents to be frightened, and to be gently terrorised by the bacteriological scenarios, on the basis of a kind of affective patriotism, even while it preserves a fairly profound indifference to the war. But it censors this indifference, on the grounds that we must not cut ourselves o ff from the world scene , that we must be mobilised at least as extras in order to rescue war: we have no other passion with which to replace it. It is the same with politi cal participation under normal circumstances: this is largely second hand, taking place against a backdrop of spontaneous indifference. It is the same with God: even when we no longer believe, we continue to believe that we believe. In this hysteri- is it really taking place? 5 1 cal replacement function, we identify at once those who are superfluous and they are many. By contrast, the few who advance the hypothesis of this profound indifference will be received as traitors. By the force of the media, this war liberates an exponential mass of stupidity, not the particular stupidity of war, which is considerable, but the professional and functional stupidity of those who pontificate in perpetual commentary on the event: all the Bouvards and Pecuchets for hire, the would-be raiders of the lost image, the CNN types and all the master singers of strategy and information who make us experience the empti ness of television as never before. This war, it must be said, con stitutes a merciless test. Fortunately, no one will hold this expert or general or that intellectual for hire to account for the idiocies or absurdities proffered the day before, since these will be erased by those of the following day. In this manner, every one is amnestied by the ultra-rapid succession of phony events and phony discourses. The laundering of stupidity by the esca lation of stupidity which reconstitutes a sort of total innocence, namely the innocence of washed and bleached brains, stupefied not by the violence but by the sinister insignificance of the images. Chevimement in the desert: Morituri te salu tantl Ridiculous . France with its old Jaguars and its presidential slippers. Capillon on television: the benefit of this war will have been 52 The Gulf War: to recycle our military leaders on television. One shudders at the thought that in another time. in a real war. they were oper ational on the battlefield. Imbroglio: that pacifist demonstration in Paris. thus indirectly for S addam Hussein. who does want war. and against the French Government which does not want it. and which from the outset gives all the signs of refusing to take part. or of doing so reluctantly. Deserted shops. suspended vacations. the slowdown of activity. the city turned over to the absent masses: it may well be that. behind the alibi of panic. this war should be the dreamed-for opportunity to soft-pedal, the opportunity to slow down. to ease ofT the pace. The crazed particles calm down. the war erases the guerrilla warfare of everyday life. Catharsis? No: renovation. Or perhaps. with everyone glued at home. TV plays out fully its role of social control by collective stupefaction: turning useless ly upon itself like a dervish. it affIXes populations all the better for deceiving them. as with a bad detective novel which we cannot believe could be so pointless . Iraq is being rebuilt even before it has been destroyed. After sales service. Such anticipation reduces even further the credi bility of the war. which did not need this to discourage those who wanted to believe in it. . is it really taking place? 53 Sometimes a glimmer of black humour: the twelve thou sand coffins sent along with the arms and ammunition. Here too. the Americans demonstrate their presumption: their pro jections and their losses are without common measure. But Saddam challenged them with being incapable of sacrificing ten thousand men in a war: they replied by sending twelve thousand coffms. The overestimation of losses is part of the same megaloma niac light show as the publicised deployment of "Desert Shield" and the orgy of bombardment. The pilots no longer even have any targets. The Iraqis no longer even have enough decoys to cater for the incessant raids. The same target must be bombed five times. Mockery. The British artillery unleashed for twenty four hours. Long since there was nothing left to destroy. Why then? In order "to cover the noise of the armoured columns advancing towards the front by the noise of the bombardment. " Of course. the effect of surprise must be maintained (it is February 21). The best part is that there was no longer anyone there. the Iraqis had already left. Absurdity. Saddam is a mercenary. the Americans are missionaries. But once the mercenary is beaten. the missionaries become de facto the mercenaries of the entire world. But the price for becoming a perfect mercenary is to be stripped of all political intelligence and all will. The Americans cannot escape it: if they want to be the police of the world and the New World Order. they must lose all political authority in favour of their operational capaci ty alone. They will become pure executants and everyone else 54 The Gulf War: pure extras in the consensual and policed New World Order. Whoever the dictator to be destroyed, any punitive force sure of itself is even more frightening. Having assumed the Israeli style , the Americans will henceforth export it every where and, just as the Israelis did, lock themselves into the spi ral of unconditional repression. For the Americans, the enemy does not exist as such. Nothing personal. Your war is of no interest to me, your resistance is of no interest to me. I will destroy you when I am ready. Refusal to bargain, whereas Saddam Hussein, for his part, bargains his war by overbidding in order to fall back, attempting to force the hand by pressure and blackmail, like a hustler trying to sell his goods. The Americans understand nothing in this whole psy chodrama of bargaining, they are had every time until, with the wounded pride of the Westerner, they stiffen and impose their conditions. They understand nothing of this floating duel, this passage of arms in which, for a brief moment, the honour and dishonour of each is in play. They know only their virtue, and they are proud of their virtue. If the other wants to play, to trick and to challenge, they will virtuously employ their force. They will oppose the other's traps with their character armour and their armoured tanks. For them, the time of exchange does not exist. But the other, even if he knows that he will concede, can not do so without another form of procedure. He must be recog nised as interlocutor: this is the goal of the exchange. He must be recognised as an enemy: this is the whole aim of the war. For the Americans, bargaining is cheap whereas for the others it is a is it really taking place? 55 matter of honour, (mutual) personal recognition, linguistic strategy (language exists, it must be honoured) and respect for time (altercation demands a rhythm, it is the price of there being an Other) . The Americans take no account of these primitive subtleties. They have much to learn about symbolic exchange. By contrast, they are winners from an economic point of view. No time lost in discussion, no psychological risk in any duel with the other: it is a way of proving that time does not exist, that the other does not exist, and that all that matters is the model and mastery of the model. From a military point of view, to allow this war to endure in the way they have (instead of applying an Israeli solution and immediately exploiting the imbalance of force while short-cir cuiting all retaliatory effects), is a clumsy solution lacking in glory and full of perverse effects (Saddam's aura among the Arab masses). Nevertheless, in doing this, they impose a sus pense, a temporal vacuum in which they present to themselves and to the entire world the spectacle of their virtual power. They will have allowed the war to endure as long as it takes, not to win but to persuade the whole world of the infallibility of their machine. The victory of the model is more important than victory on the ground. Military success consecrates the triumph of arms, but the programming success consecrates the defeat of time. War-processing, the transparency of the model in the unfolding of the war, the strategy of relentless execution of a program, the electrocution of all reaction and any live initiative, includ ing their own: these are more important from the point of view of general deterrence (of friends and foes alike) than the final 56 The Gulf War: result on the ground. Clean war, white war, programmed war: more lethal than the war which sacrifices human lives. We are a long way from annihilation, holocaust and atomic apocalypse, the total war which functions as the archaic imagi nary of media hysteria. On the contrary, this kind of preventa tive, deterrent and punitive war is a warning to everyone not to take extreme measures and inflict upon themselves what they inflict on others (the missionary complex): the rule of the game that s ays everyone must remain within the limits of their power and not make war by any means whatever. Power must remain virtual and exemplary, in other words, virtuous . The decisive test is the planetary apprenticeship in this regulation . Just as wealth is no longer measured by the ostentation of wealth but by the secret circulation of speculative capital, so war is not measured by being waged but by its speculative unfolding in an abstract, electronic and informational space, the same space in which capital moves. While this conjuncture does not exclude all accident (disor der in the virtual), it is nevertheless true that the probability of the irruption of those extreme measures and mutual violence which we call war is increasingly low. Saddam the hysteric. Interminable shit kicker. The hysteric cannot be crushed: he is reborn from his symptoms as though from his ashes. Confronted by a hysteric , the other becomes paranoid, he deploys a massive apparatus of protection and is it really taking place? 57 mistrust. He suspects the hysteric of bad faith. of ruse and dis simulation. He wants to constrain him to the truth and to transparency. The hysteric is irreducible. His means are decoys and the overturning of alliances. Confronted with this lubricity. this duplicity. the paranoid can only become more rigid. more obsessional. The most violent reproach addressed to Saddam Hussein by Bush is that of being a liar. a traitor. a bad player. a trickster. Lying son of a bitch! Saddam. like a good hysteric. has never given birth to his own war: for him. it is only a phantom pregnancy. By contrast. he has until now succeeded in prevent ing Bush from giving birth to his. And. with the complicity of Gorbachev. he almost succeeded in fucking him up the ass. But the hysteric is not suicidal. this is the advantageous other side to Saddam. He is neither mad nor suicidal. perhaps he should be treated by hypnosis? The Iraqis and the Americans have at least one thing in com mon. a heinous crime which they (and with them the West) share. Many things about this war are explained by this anteri or crime from which both sides sought to profit with impunity. The secret expiation of this crime feeds the Gulf War in its con fusion and its allure of the settling of accounts . Such is the shared agreement to forget it that little is spoken about this prior episode (even by the Iranians). namely the war against Iran. Saddam must avenge his failure to win. even though he was the aggressor and sure of his impunity. He must avenge himself against the West which trained him for it. while the Americans. for their part. must suppress him as the embarrass- 58 The Gulf War: ing accomplice in that criminal act. For any government official or despot, power over his own people takes precedence over everything else. In the case of the Gulf War, this provides the only chance of a solution or a de escalation. Saddam will prefer to concede rather than destroy his internal hegemony or sacrifice his army, etc. In this sense, sheltering his planes in Iran is a good sign: rather than an offensive sign, it is the ploy of a burglar who stashes his haul in order to retrieve it when he comes out of prison, thus an argu ment against any heroic or suicidal intention. While one fraction of the intellectuals and politicians, special ists in the reserve army of mental labour, are whole-heartedly in favour of the war, and another fraction are against it from the bottom of their hearts, but for reasons no less disturbing, all are agreed on one point: this war exists, we have seen it. There is no interrogation into the event itself or its reality; or into the fraudulence of this war, the programmed and always delayed illusion of battle; or into the machination of this war and its amplification by information, not to mention the improbable orgy of material, the systematic manipulation of data, the artifi cial dramatisation . . . If we do not have practical intelligence about the war (and none among us has) , at least let us have a sceptical intelligence towards it, without renouncing the pathetic feeling of its absurdity. But there is more than one kind of absurdity: that of the massacre and that of being caught up in the illusion of mas sacre. It is just as in La Fontaine's fable: the day there is a real is it really taking place? 59 war you will not even be able to tell the difference. The real vic tory of the simulators of war is to have drawn everyone into this rotten simulation.  The Gulf War did not tal(e place Since this war was won in advance. we will never know what it would have been like had it existed. We will never know what an Iraqi taking part with a chance of fighting would have been like. We will never know what an American taking part with a chance of being beaten would have been like. We have seen what an ultra-modern process of electrocution is like. a process of paralysis or lobotomy of an experimental enemy away from the field of battle with no possibility of reaction. But this is not a war. any more than 1 0 . 000 tonnes of bombs per day is suffi cient to make it a war. Any more than the direct transmission by CNN of real time information is sufficient to authenticate a war. One is reminded of Capricorn One in which the flight of a manned rocket to Mars. which only took place in a desert stu dio. was relayed live to all the television stations in the world. It has been called a surgical war. and it is true that there is something in common between this in vitro destruction and in vitro fertilisation - the latter also produces a living being but it 62 The Gulf War is not sufficient to produce a child. Except in the New Genetic Order, a child issues from sexual copulation. Except in the New World Order, war is born of an antagonistic, destructive but dual relation between two adversaries. This war is an asexual surgical war, a matter of war-processing in which the enemy only appears as a computerised target, just as sexual partners only appear as code-names on the screen of Mirotel Rose. If we can speak of sex in the latter case then perhaps the Gulf War can pass for a war. The Iraqis blow up civilian buildings in order to give the impression of a dirty war. The Americans disguise satellite information to give the impression of a clean war. Everything in trompe l'oeil! The fmal Iraqi ploy: to secretly evacuate Kuwait and thereby mock the great offensive. With hindsight, the Presidential Guard itself was perhaps only a mirage ; in any case, it was exploited as such until the end. All this is no more than a stratagem and the war ended in general boredom, or worse in the feeling of having been duped. Iraqi boasting , American hypocrisy. It is as though there was a virus infecting this war from the beginning which emptied it of all credibility. It is perhaps because the two adversaries did not even confront each other face to face, the one lost in its virtual war won in advance, the other buried in its traditional war lost in advance. They never s aw each other: when the Americans finally appeared behind their curtain of bombs the Iraqis had already disappeared behind their curtain of smoke . . . The general eiTect i s o f a farce which we will not even have did not take place 63 had time to applaud. The only escalation will have been in decoys . opening onto the final era of great confrontations which vanish in the mist. The events in Eastern Europe still gave the impression of a divine surprise. No such thing in the Gulf. where it is as though events were devoured in advance by the parasite virus . the retro-virus of history. This is why we could advance the hypothesis that this war would not take place. And now that it is over. we can realise at last that it did not take place. It was buried for too long. whether in the concrete and s and Iraqi bunkers or in the Americans' electronic sky. or behind that other form of sepulchre. the chattering television screens. Today everything tends to go underground. includ ing information in its informational bunkers . Even war has gone underground in order to survive. In this forum of war which is the Gulf. everything is hidden: the planes are hidden. the tanks are buried. Israel plays dead. the images are cen sored and all information is blockaded in the desert: only TV functions as a medium without a message. giving at last the image of pure television. Like an animal. the war goes to ground. It hides in the sand. it hides in the sky. It is like the Iraqi planes: it knows that it has no chance if it surfaces. It awaits its hour . . . which will never come. The Americans themselves are the vectors of this catalepsy. There is no question that the war came from their plan and its programmed unfolding. No question that. in their war. the Iraqis went to war. No question that the Other came from their computers. All reaction. even on their part (as we saw in the episode of the prisoners. which should have produced a violent 64 The Gulf War reaction) . all abreaction against the program. all improvisation is abolished (even the Israelis were muzzled). What is tested here in this foreclosure of the enemy. this experimental reclu sion of war. is the future validity for the entire planet of this type of suffocating and machinic performance . virtual and relentless in its unfolding. In this perspective. war could not take place. There is no more room for war than for any form of living impulse. War stripped of its passions. its phantasms. its finery. its veils. its violence. its images; war stripped bare by its technicians even. and then reclothed by them with all the artifices of elec tronics. as though with a second skin. But these too are a kind of decoy that technology sets up before itself. Saddam Hussein's decoys still aim to deceive the enemy. whereas the American technological decoy only aims to deceive itself. The first days of the lightning attack. dominated by this technological mystifica tion. will remain one of the finest bluffs. one of the finest collec tive mirages of contemporary History (along with Timisoara). We are all accomplices in these fantasmagoria. it must be said. as we are in any publicity campaign . In the past. the unem ployed constituted the reserve army of Capital; today. in our enslavement to information. we constitute the reserve army of all planetary mystifications. Saddam constructed his entire war as a decoy (whether deliber ately or not) . including the decoy of defeat which even more did not take place 65 resembles a hysterical syncope of the type: peek-a-boo, I am no longer there I But the Americans also constructed their affair as a decoy, like a parabolic mirror of their own power, taking no account of what was before them, or hallucinating those oppo site to be a threat of comparable size to themselves: otherwise they would not even have been able to believe in their own vic tory. Their victory itself in the form of a triumphal decoy echoes the Iraqi decoy of defeat. Ultimately, both were accomplices as thick as thieves, and we were collectively abused. This is why the war remains indefinable and ungraspable, all strategy hav ing given way to stratagem. One of the two adversaries is a rug salesman, the other an arms salesman: they have neither the same logic nor the same strategy , even though they are both crooks . There is not enough communication between them to enable them to make war upon each other. S addam will never fight, while the Americans will fight against a fictive double on screen. They see Saddam as he should be, a modernist hero, worth defeating (the fourth biggest army in the world!). Saddam remains a rug salesman who takes the Americans for rug salesmen like him self, stronger than he but less gifted for the scam. He hears nothing of deterrence. For there to be deterrence, there must be communication. It is a game of rational strategy which presup poses real time communication between the two adversaries; whereas in this war there was never communication at any moment, but always dislocation in time, Saddam evolving in a long time, that of blackmail, of procrastination, false advance, of retreat: the recurrent time of The Thousand and One Nights - exactly the inverse of real time. Deterrence in fact presupposes 66 The Gulf War a virtual escalation between the two adversaries. By contrast, Saddam's entire strategy rests upon de-escalation (one sets a maximal price then descends from it in stages ) . And their respective denouements are not at all the same. The failure of the sales pitch is marked by evasive action: the salesman rolls up his rug and leaves. Thus, Saddam disappears without fur ther ado. The failure of deterrence is marked by force: this is the case with the Americans . Once again , there is no relation between the two, each plays in his own space and misses the other. We cannot even say that the Americans defeated Saddam: he defaulted on them, he de-escalated and they were not able to escalate sufficiently to destroy him. Finally, who could have rendered more service to everyone, in such a short time at such little cost, than Saddam Hussein? He reinforced the security of Israel (reflux of the Intifada, revival of world opinion for Israel) , assured the glory of American arms, gave Gorbachev a political chance, opened the door to Iran and Shiism, relaunched the UN, etc . , all for free since he alone paid the price of blood. Can we conceive of so admirable a man? And he did not even falll He remains a hero for the Arab masses. It is as though he were an agent of the CIA disguised as Saladin. Resist the probability of any image or information whatever. Be more virtual than events themselves, do not seek to re-estab lish the truth, we do not have the means, but do not be duped, and to that end re-immerse the war and all information in the did not take place 67 virtuality from whence they come. Turn deterrence back against itself. Be meteorologically sensitive to stupidity. In the case of this war. it is a question of the living illustra tion of an implacable logic which renders us incapable of envis aging any hypothesis other than that of its real occurrence. The realist logic which lives on the illusion of the final result. The denial of the facts is never one of them. The final resolution of an equation as complex as a war is never immediately appar ent in the war. It is a question of seizing the logic of its unfold ing. in the absence of any prophetic illusion . To be for or against the war is idiotic if the question of the very probability of this war. its credibility or degree of reality has not been raised even for a moment. All political and ideological speculations fall under mental deterrence (stupidity). By virtue of their immediate consensus on the evidence they feed the unreality of this war. they reinforce its bluff by their unconscious dupery. The real warmongers are those who live on the ideology of the veracity of this war. while the war itself wreaks its havoc at another level by trickery. hyperreality. simulacra. and by the entire mental strategy of deterrence which is played out in the facts and in the images. in the anticipation of the real by the virtual. of the event by virtual time. and in the inexorable con fusion of the two . All those who understand nothing of this involuntarily reinforce this halo of bluff which surrounds us. It is as though the Iraqis were electrocuted. lobotomised. run ning towards the television journalists in order to surrender or immobilised beside their tanks. not even demoralised: de-cere- 68 The Gulf War bralised. stupefied rather than defeated - can this be called a war? Today we see the shreds of this war rot in the desert just like the shreds of the map in Borges' fable rotting at the four corners of the territory (moreover. strangely. he situates his fable in the same oriental regions of the Empire). Fake war. deceptive war. not even the illusion but the disil lusion of war. linked not only to defensive calculation. which translates into the monstrous prophylaxis of this military machine. but also to the mental disillusion of the combatants themselves. and to the global disillusion of everyone else by means of information. For deterrence is a total machine (it is the true war machine). and it not only operates at the heart of the event - where electronic coverage of the war devoured time and space. where virtuality (the decoy. programming. the anticipation of the end) devoured all the oxygen of war like a fuel-air explo sive bomb - it also operates in our heads . Information has a profound function of deception. It matters little what it "informs" us about. its "coverage" of events mat ters little since it is precisely no more than a cover: its purpose is to produce consensus by flat encephalogram. The comple ment of the unconditional simulacrum in the field is to train everyone in the unconditional reception of broadcast simu lacra. Abolish any intelligence of the event. The result is a suf focating atmosphere of deception and stupidity. And if people are vaguely aware of being caught up in this appeasement and this disillusion by images. they swallow the deception and remain fascinated by the evidence of the montage of this war with which we are inoculated everywhere: through the eyes. the senses and in discourse. did not take place 69 There are ironic balance sheets which help to temper the shock or the bluff of this war. A simple calculation shows that, of the 500,000 American soldiers involved during the seven months of operations in the Gulf, three times as many would have died from road accidents alone had they stayed in civilian life . Should w e consider multiplying clean wars in order t o reduce the murderous death toll of peacetime? On this basis, we could develop a philosophy of perverse effects, which we tend to regard as always maleficent whereas in fact maleficent causes (war, illness, viruses) often produce beneficial perverse effects. They are no less perverse as a result, but more interesting than the others, in particular because it has been a matter of principle never to study them. Except for Mandeville, of course, in The Fable of the Bees, where he shows that every society prospers on the basis of its vices. But the course of events has drawn us further and further away from an intelligence of this order. An example: deterrence itself. It only fun c t i o n s well between equal forces. Ideally, each party should possess the same weapons before agreeing to renounce their use. It is therefore the dissemination of (atomic) weapons alone which can ensure effective global deterrence and the indefinite sus pension of war. The present politics of non-dissemination plays with fire: there will always be enough madmen to launch an archaic challenge below the level of an atomic riposte - wit ness Saddam. Things being as they are, we should place our hopes in the spread of weapons rather than in their (never respected) limitation. Here too, the beneficial perverse effect of dissemination should be taken into account. We should esca- 70 The Gulf War late in the virtual (of destruction) under penalty of de-escalat ing in the real. This is the paradox of deterrence. It is like infor mation . culture or other material and spiritual goods: only their profusion renders them indifferent and neutralises their negative perverse effects . Multiply vices in order to ensure the collective good. That said. the consequences of what did not take place may be as substantial as those of an historical event. The hypothe sis would be that. in the case of the Gulf War as in the case of the events in Eastern Europe. we are no longer dealing with " historical events" but with places of collapse. Eastern Europe saw the collapse of communism. the construction of which had indeed been an historic event. borne by a vision of the world and a utopia. By contrast. its collapse is borne by noth ing and bears nothing. but only opens onto a confused desert left vacant by the retreat of history and immediately invaded by its refuse. The Gulf War is also a place of collapse. a virtual and metic ulous operation which leaves the same impression of a non event where the military confrontation fell short and where no political power proved itself. The collapse of Iraq and stupefac tion of the Arab world are the consequences of a confrontation which did not take place and which undoubtedly never could take place. But this non-war in the form of a victory also conse crates the Western political collapse throughout the Middle East. incapable even of eliminating Saddam and of imagining or imposing anything apart from this new desert and police did not take place 7 1 order called world order. As a consequence of this non-event and living proof of Western political weakness, Saddam is indeed still there, once again what he always was, the mercenary of the West, deserv ing punishment for not remaining in his place, but also worthy of continuing to gas the Kurds and the Shiites since he had the tact not to employ these weapons against those Western dogs, and worthy of keeping his Presidential Guard since he had the heart to not sacrifice them in combat. Miraculously (they were thought to have been destroyed), the Presidential Guard recov ers all its valour against the insurgents. Moreover, it is typk:al of Saddam to prove his combativity and ferocity only against his internal enemies: as with every true dictator, the ultimate end of politics, carefully masked elsewhere by the effects of democracy, is to maintain control of one's own people by any means, including terror. This function embodied by dictator ships - that of being politically revealing and at the same time an alibi for democracies - no doubt explains the inexplicable weakness of the large powers towards them. Saddam liquidates the communists, Moscow flirts even more with him; he gasses the Kurds, it is not held against him; he eliminates the religiOUS cadres, the whole of Islam makes peace with him. Whence this impunity? Why are we content to inflict a perfect semblance of military defeat upon him in exchange for a perfect semblance of victory for the Americans? This ignominious remounting of Saddam, replacing him in the saddle after his clown act at the head of the holy war, clearly shows that on all sides the war is considered not to have taken place. Even the last phase of this armed mystifi catio n will h ave changed nothin g . for the 72 The Gulf War 1 00,000 Iraqi dead will only have been the final decoy that Saddam will have sacrificed, the blood money paid in forfeit according to a calculated equivalence, in order to conserve his power. What is worse is that these dead still serve as an alibi for those who do not want to have been excited for nothing, nor to have been had for nothing: at least the dead would prove that this war was indeed a war and not a shameful and pointless hoax, a programmed and melodramatic version of what was the drama of war (Marx once spoke of this second, melodra matic version of a primary event). But we can rest assured that the next soap opera in this genre will enjoy an even fresher and more joyful credulity. What a j ob Saddam has done for the Americans , from his combat with Iran up to this full scale debacle! Nevertheless, everything is ambiguous since this collapse removes any demonstrative value from American power, along with any belief in the Western ideologies of modernity, democracy, or secularity, of which Saddam had been made the incarnation in the Arab world. We can see that the Western powers dreamt of an Islamic pere stroika, on the newly formed model of Eastern Europe: democ racy irresistibly establishing itself in those countries conquered by the forces of Good. The Arab countries will be liberated (the peoples cannot but want to be liberated) , an'd the women of Saudi Arabia will have the right to drive. Alas! this is not to be. did not take place 73 The conquered have not been convinced and have withdrawn, leaving the victors only the bitter taste of an unreal made-to order victory. Defeat can also be a rival bid and a new begin ning, the chain of implication never stops. The eventual out come is unpredictable and certainly will not be reckoned in terms of freedom. No accidents occurred in this war, everything unfolded accord ing to programmatic order, in the absence of passional disor der. Nothing occurred which would have metamorphosed events into a duel. Even the status of the deaths may be questioned, on both sides. The minimal losses of the coalition pose a serious problem, which never arose in any earlier war. The paltry number of deaths may be cause for self-congratulation, but nothing will prevent this figure being paltry. Strangely, a war without vic tims does not seem like a real war but rather the prefiguration of an experimental, blank war, or a war even more inhuman because it is without human losses. No heroes on the other side either, where death was most often that of sacrificed extras, left as cover in the trenches of Kuwait, or civilians serving as bait and martyrs for the dirty war. Disappeared, abandoned to their lot, in the thick fog of war, held in utter contempt by their chief, without even the collective glory of a number (we do not know how many they are) . Along with the hostage or the repentant, the figure of the 74 The Gulf War " disappeared" has become emblematic in our political universe. Before, there were the dead and traitors, now there are the dis appeared and the repentant: both blanks. Even the dead are blanks: "We have already buried them, they can no longer be counted , " dixit Schwarzkopf. At Timisoara, there were too many of them, here there are not enough, but the effect is the same. The non-will to know is part of the non-war. Lies and shame appeared throughout this war like a sexually transmit ted disease. Blank out the war. Just as Kuwait and Iraq were rebuilt before they were destroyed, so at every phase of this war things unfolded as though they were virtually completed. It is not for lack of brandishing the threat of a chemical war, a bloody war, a world war - everyone had their say - as though it were necessary to give ourselves a fright, to maintain everyone in a state of erection for fear of seeing the flaccid member of war fall down. This futile masturbation was the delight of all the TVs. Ordinarily we denounce this kind of behaviour as emphatic or as empty and theatrical affectation: why not denounce an entire event when it is affected by the same hysteria? In many respects, this war was a scandal of the same type as Timisoara. Not so much the war itself but the manipulation of minds and blackmail by the scenario . The worst scandal being the collective demand for intoxication, the complicity of all in the effects of war, the effects of reality and false trans parency in this war. We could almost speak of media harass ment along the lines of sexual harassment. Alas! the problem did not take place 75 always remains the same and it is insoluble: where does real violence begin, where does consenting violence end? Bluff and information serve as aphrodisiacs for war, just as the corpses at Timisoara and their global diffusion served as aphrodisiacs for the Romanian revolution. But, ultimately, what have you got against aphrodisiacs? Nothing so long as orgasm is attained. The media mix has become the prerequisite to any orgasmic event. We need it pre cisely because the event escapes us, because conviction escapes us. We have a pressing need of simulation, even that of war, much more than we have of milk, j am or liberty, and we have an immediate intuition of the means necessary to obtain it . This is indeed the fundamental advance of our democracy: the image-function, the blackmail-function, the information-func tion, the speculation-function. The obscene aphrodisiac func tion fulfilled by the decoy of the event, by the decoy of war. Drug-function. We have neither need of nor the taste for real drama or real war. What we require is the aphrodisiac spice of the multiplica tion of fakes and the hallucination of violence, for we have a hallucinogenic pleasure in all things, which, as in the case of drugs, is also the pleasure in our indifference and our irrespon sibility and thus in our true liberty. Here is the supreme form of democracy. Through it our definitive retreat from the world takes shape: the pleasure of mental speculation in images equalling that of capital in a stock market run, or that of the corpses in the charnel house of Timisoara. But , ultimately, what have you got against drugs? Nothing. Apart from fact that the collective disillusion is 76 The Gulf War terrible once the spell is broke n ; fo r example, when the corpses at Timisoara were uncovered, or when awareness of the subterfuge of the war takes hold. The scandal today is no longer in the assault on moral values but in the assault on the re ality principle . The profound s c andal which here after infects the whole sphere of information with a Timisoara complex lay in the compulsory participation of the corpses, the transformation of the corpses into extras which in the same moment transforms all those who saw and believed in it into c o mpulsory extr a s , so that they themselves become corpses in the charnel house of news signs. The odium lies in the malversation of the real, the faking of the event and the malversation of the war. The charnel houses of Timisoara are such a parody, so paltry by contrast with the real slaughter houses of history! This Gulf War is such a sham, so paltry: the point is not to rehabilitate other wars, but rather that the recourse to the same pathos is all the more odious when there is no longer even the alibi of a war. The presumption of information and the media here doubles the political arrogance of the Western empire. All those jour nalists who set themselves up as bearers of the universal con science, all those presenters who set themselves up as strate gists, all the while overwhelming us with a flood of useless images. Emotional blackmail by massacre, fraud. Instead of dis cussing the threshold of social tolerance for immigration we would do better to discuss the threshold of mental tolerance for information. With regard to the latter, we can say that it was deliberately crossed. did not take place 77 The delirious spectacle of wars which never happened: the transparent glacier of flights which never flew. All these events, from Eastern Europe or from the Gulf, which under the colours of war and liberation led only to political and historical disillusion ment (it seems that the famous Chinese Cultural Revolution was the same: a whole strategy of more or less concerted internal desta bilisation which short-circuited popular spontaneity), post-syn chronisation events where one has the impression of never having seen the original. Bad actors, bad doubles, bad striptease: through out these seven months, the war has unfolded like a long striptease, following the calculated escalation of undressing and approaching the incandescent point of explosion (like that of erotic effusion) but at the same time withdrawing from it and maintain ing a deceptive suspense (teasing), such that when the naked body finally appears, it is no longer naked, desire no longer exists· and the orgasm is cut short. In this manner, the escalation was adminis tered to us by drip-feed, removing us further and further from the passage to action and, in any case, from the war. It is like truth according to Nietzsche: we no longer believe that the truth is true when all its veils have been removed. Similarly, we do not believe that war is war when all uncertainty is supposedly removed and it appears as a naked operation. The nudity of war is no less virtual than that of the erotic body in the apparatus of striptease. On the slopes at Courchevel, the news from the Gulf War is relayed by loudspeakers during the intensive bombardments. Did the others over there, the Iraqis in the sand bunkers receive the snow reports from Courchevel? 78 The Gulf War February 2 2 was the day of the Apocalypse: the day of the unleashing of the land offensive behind its curtain of bombs. and in France. by a kind of black humour. the day of the worst traffic j am on the autoroutes to the snow. While the tanks advanced to the assault on Kuwait . the automobile hordes advanced to the assault on the snowfields. Moreover. the tanks went through much more easily than the waves of leisure-seek ers. And the dead were more numerous on the snow front than on the war front. Are we so lacking in death. even in time of war. that it must be sought on the playing fields? Stuck in traffic. one can always amuse oneself by listening to the Gulf radio reports: the time of information never stops, the slower things are on the roads the more things circulate on the wavelengths. Another distraction was that of the young couple who switched between watching the war on TV and their child to be. filmed and recorded in the mother' s womb and made available on ultrasound cassette. When the war stops. they watch the kid. At the level of images it is the same combat: war before it has broken out. the child before it has been born. Leisure in the virtual era. The liquidation of the Shiites and the Kurds by Saddam under the benevolent eye of the American divisions mysteriously stopped in their lightning advance "in order not to humiliate an entire people" offers a bloody analogy with the crushing of the Paris Commune in 1 8 7 1 under the eye of the Prussian did not take place 79 armies. And the good souls who cried out for seven months. for or against the war but always for the good cause. those who denounced the aberrations of the pro-Iraqi policy ten years after the event when it was no longer relevant. and all the repentants of the Rights of Man. once again do nothing. The world accepts this as the wages of defeat. or rather. on the American side. as the wages of victory. The same Americans who. after having dumped hundreds of thousands of tonnes of bombs. today claim to abstain from "intervening in the internal affairs of a State. " I t i s nevertheless admirable that we call the Arabs and Moslems traditionalists with the same repulsion that we call someone racist. even though we live in a typically traditionalist society although one simultaneously on the way to disintegration. We do not practise hard fundamentalist traditionalism. we practise soft. subtle and shameful democratic traditionalism by consen s u s . H o w e v e r . c o n s e n s u a l t r a d i t i o n a l i s m ( t h a t of t h e Enlightenment. the Rights o f Man. the Left i n power. the repen tant intellectual and sentimental humanism) is every bit as fierce as that of any tribal religion or primitive society. It denounces the other as absolute Evil in exactly the same manner (these are the words of Fran ois Mitterand apropos the Salman Rushdie affair: whence does he derive such an archaic form of thought ? ) . The difference between the two tradition alisms (hard and soft) lies in the fact that our own (the soft) holds all the means to destroy the other and does not resile fr o m t h e i r u s e . As t h o u g h by c h a n c e . it is a l w a y s t h e 80 The Gulf War Enlightenment fundamentalist who oppresses and destroys the other, who can only defy it symbolically. In order to justify our selves, we give substance to the threat by turning the fatwa against Salman Rushdie into a sword of Damocles hanging over the Western world, sustaining a disproportionate terror in complete misrecognition of the difference between symbolic challenge and technical aggression. In the long run, the sym bolic challenge is more serious than a victorious aggression. If a simple fatwa, a simple death sentence can plunge the West into such depression (the vaudeville of terror on the part of writers and intellectuals on this occasion could never be portrayed cru elly enough) , if the West prefers to believe in this threat, it is because it is paralysed by its own power, in which it does not believe, precisely because of its enormity (the Islamic "neuro sis" would be due to the excessive tension created by the dispro portion of ends; the disproportion of means from which we suffer creates by contrast a serious depression, a neurosis of powerlessness). If the West believed in its own power, it would not give a moment's thought to this threat. The most amusing aspect, however, is that the other does not believe in his power lessness either, and he who does not believe in his powerless ness is stronger than he who does not believe in his power, be this a thousand times greater. The Arab Book of Ruses gives a thousand examples of this, but the West has no intelligence of such matters. This is how we arrive at an unreal war in which the over dimensioned technical power in turn over-evaluates the real forces of an enemy which it cannot see. And if it is astonished when it so easily triumphs this is because it knows neither how did not take place 81 to believe in itself nor how to ruse with itself. By contrast, what it does know obscurely is that in its present form it can be anni hilated by the least ruse. The Americans would do well to be more astonished at their "victory," to be astonished at their force and to find an equiva lent for it in the intelligence (of the other), lest their power play tricks with them. Thus, if the cunning but stupid Saddam had conceded one week earlier, he would have inflicted a consider able political defeat on the Americans. But did he want to? In any case, he succeeded in his own reinstatement, whereas they had sworn to destroy him. But did they swear it? Saddam played the Americans' game at every turn, but even defeated he was the better player at ruse and diversion . The Book of Ruses still harbours many secrets unknown to the Pentagon. Brecht: "This beer isn't a beer, but that is compensated for by the fact that this cigar isn't a cigar either. If this beer wasn't a beer and this cigar really was a cigar, then there would be a problem. " In the same manner, this war is not a war, but this is compensated for by the fact that information is not information either. Thus everything is in order. If this war had not been a war and the images had been real images, there would have been a problem. For in that case the non-war would have appeared for what it is: a scandal. Similarly, if the war had been a real war and the information had not been information, this non-information would have appeared for what it is: a scandal. In both cases, there would have been a problem. There is one further problem for those who believe that this 82 The Gulf War war took place: how is it that a real war did not generate real images? Same problem for those who believe in the Americans' "victory " : how is it that Saddam is still there as though nothing had happened? Whereas everything becomes coherent if we suppose that, given this victory was not a victory, the defeat of Saddam was not a defeat either. Everything evens out and everything is in order: the war, the victory and the defeat are all equally unreal, equally non-existent. The same coherence in the irreality of the adversaries: the fact that the Americans never saw the Iraqis is compensated for by the fact that the Iraqis never fought them. Brecht again: "As for the place not desired, there is something there and that's disorder. As for the desired place, there is noth ing there and that's order. " The New World Order i s made u p of all these compensa tions and the fact that there is nothing rather than some thing, on the ground, on the screens, in our heads: consensus by deterrence . At the desired place (the GuIO , nothing took place, non-war. At the desired place (TV, information), noth ing took place, no images, nothing but filler. Not much took place in all our heads either, and that too is in order. The fact that there was nothing at this or that desired place was har moniously compensated for by the fact that there was noth ing elsewhere either. In this manner, the global order unifies all the partial orders. In Eastern Europe, global order was re-established in accor dance with the same paradoxical dialectic : where there was did not take place 83 something (communism, but this was precisely disorder from a global point of view), today there is nothing, but there is order. Things are in democratic order, even if they are in the worst confusion. The Arabs: there where they should not be (immigrants) , there is disorder. There where they should be (in Palestine) but are not, there is order. The fact that in the Arab world nothing is possible, not even war, and that Arabs are deterred, disap pOinted, powerless and neutralised, that is order. But this is harmoniously compensated for by the fact that at the marked place of power (America), there is no longer anything but a total political powerlessness. Such is the New World Order. A variant on Clausewitz: non-war is the absence ofpolitics pursued by other means " . It no longer proceeds from a political will to dominate or from a vital impulsion or an antagonistic violence, but from the will to impose a general consensus by deterrence. This consensual violence can be as deadly as conflictual vio lence, but its aim is to overcome any hegemonic rivalry, even when cold and balanced by terror, as it has been over the last forty years. It was already at work in all the democracies taken one by one; it operates today on a global level which is con ceived as an immense democracy governed by a homogeneous order which has as its emblem the UN and the Rights of Man. The Gulf War is the first consensual war, the first war conduct ed legally and globally with a view to putting an end to war and liquidating any confrontation likely to threaten the hence- 84 The Gulf War forward unified system of control. This was already the aim of dualistic (East and West) deterrence; today we pass to the monopolistic s t a ge under the aegis of American p o w e r . Logically, this democratic and consensual form should b e able to dispense with war, but it will no doubt continue to have local and episodic need of it. The Gulf War is one of these transitive episodes , hesitating for this reason between hard and soft forms: virtual war or real war? But the balance is in the process of definitively inclining in one direction, and tomorrow there will be nothing but the virtual violence of consensus, the simul taneity in real time of the global consensus: this will happen tomorrow and it will be the beginning of a world with no tomorrow. Electronic war no longer has any political objective strictly speaking: it functions as a preventative electroshock against any future conflict. Just as in modern communication there is no longer any interlocutor, so in this electronic war there is no longer any enemy, there is only a refractory element which must be neutralised and consensualised . This is what the Americans seek to do, these missionary people bearing electro shocks which will shepherd everybody towards democracy. It is therefore pointless to question the political aims of this war: the only (transpolitical) aim is to align everybody with the global lowest common denominator, the democratic denominator (which, in its extension, approaches ever closer to the degree zero of politics). The lowest common multiplier being informa tion in all its forms, which, as it extends towards infinity, also approaches ever closer to the degree zero of its content. In this sense, consensus as the degree zero of democracy did not take place 85 and information as the degree zero of opinion are in total affin ity: the New World Order will be both consensual and televisu al. That is indeed why the targeted bombings carefully avoided the Iraqi television antennae (which stand out like a sore thumb in the sky over Baghdad). War is no longer what it used to be . . . The crucial stake, the decisive stake in this whole affair i s the consensual reduction of Islam to the global order. Not to destroy but to domesticate it, by whatever means: modernisa tion, even military, politicisation, nationalism, democracy, the Rights of Man, anything at all to electrocute the resistances and the symbolic challenge that Islam represents for the entire West. There is no miracle, the confrontation will last as long as this process has not reached its term; by contrast, it will stop as though of its own accord the day when this form of radical challenge has been liquidated. This was how it happened in the Vietnam war: the day when China was neutralised, when the " wild " Vietnam with its forces of liberation and revolt was replaced by a truly bureaucratic and military organisation capable of ensuring the continuation of Order, the Vietnam war stopped immediately - but ten years were necessary for this political domestication to take place (whether it took place under communism or democracy is of no importance). Same thing with the Algerian war: its end, which was believed to be impossible, took place of its own accord, not by virtue of De Gaulle's sagacity, but from the moment the maquis with their revolutionary potential were finally liquidated and an Algerian 86 The Gulf War army and a bureaucracy, which had been set up in Tunisia without ever engaging in combat, were in a position to ensure the continuation of power and the exercise of order. Our wars thus have less to do with the confrontation of warriors than with the domestication of the refractory forces on the planet , those uncontrollable elements as the police would say, to which belong not only Islam in its entirety but wild ethnic groups, minority languages etc. All that is singular and irreducible must be reduced and absorbed. This is the law of democracy and the New World Order. In this sense, the Iran Iraq war was a successful first phase: Iraq served to liquidate the most radical form of the anti-Western challenge, even though it never defeated it. The fact that this mercenary prowess should give rise to the present reversal and to the necessity of its own destruction is a cruel irony, but perfectly j ustified. We will have shamefully merited everything which happens to us. This does not excuse Iraq, which remains the objective accomplice of the West, even in the present confrontation, to the extent that the challenge of Islam, with its irreducible and dangerous alterity and symbolic challenge, has once again been channelled, subtilised and politically, militarily and religiously deflected by Saddam ' s undertaking. Even i n the war against the West h e played his role in the domestication of an Islam for which he has no use. His elimination, if it should take place, will only raise a danger ous mortgage. The real stake, the challenge of Islam and behind it that of all the forms of culture refractory to the occi dental world, remains intact. Nobody knows who will win. For as Holderlin said, "where danger threatens, that which saves did not take place 87 us from it also grows. " As a result. the more the hegemony of the global consensus is reinforced. the greater the risk. or the chances. of its collapse. The author: Jean Baudrillard. former Professor of Sociology at the University of Paris (Nanterre). is now widely regarded as one of the most significant and controversial contemporary thinkers. His commentaries on events. objects. habits and other cultural phenomena have shaped the way global culture reflects on itself. His works in translation include The Mirror of Production. Seduction. Fatal Strategies and Symbolic Exchange and Death. The translator: Paul Patton lectures in Philosophy at the University of Sydney. He has previously translated essays by Baudrillard and Foucault. and recently translated Difference and Repetition by Gilles Deleuze. He writes on French philosophy and political theory and recently edited Nietzsche. Feminism and Political Theory.  Ill . The USIOil of the End Jean Baudrillard Translated by Chris Turner Polity Press This translation copyright© Polity Press 1994. First published in France as L'illusion de la fin© Editions Galilee, 1992. Published with the assistance of the French Ministry of Culture. First published in 1994 by Polity Press in association with Blackwell Publishers. Editorial office: Polity Press 65 Bridge Street Cambridge CB2 1UR, UK Marketing and production: Blackwell Publishers 108 Cowley Road Oxford OX4 1JF, UK All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by .any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, wi hout the prior permission of the publisher. Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hires! out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding _or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar .condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. ISBN 0 7456 1221 0 ISBN 0 7456 1222 9 {pbk) British Library Catalogu.ing-in-Publication Data A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. Typeset in 11-on 13pt Sabon by Photoprint, Torquay, S,. Devon Printed in Great Britain by Hartnolls Limited This book is printed on acid-free paper. Things can reach a state of Breakdown greater than themselves, that is to say, they can attain a degree of impairment at which their existence has less value than a zero-existence, a state where replacement has become a maleficent temptation . . . Macedonio Fernandez It is in the absolute void that the absolute event occurs. So the void must only have been relative, since death has remained virtual.  Contents Translator's acknowledgements Pataphysics of the year 2000 The reversal of history The ascent of the vacuum towards the periphery The event strike The thawing of the East The strategy of dissolution The Timi§oara massacre The illusion of war Catastrophe management The dance of the fossils Maleficent ecology Immortality How can you jump over your shadow when you no longer have one? Exponential instaQility, exponential stability Hysteresis of the millennium vii viii 1 10 14 21 28 34 54 62 66 72 78 89 101 110 115 Translator's acknowledgements Thanks are due to Leslie Hill and Marie-Dominique Maison for invaluable help with linguistic matters and to Giynis Powell for research assistance. I must also thank Jean Baudrillard for taking time from his many other commitments to respond to my queries. All the footnotes to the text are mine. This translation is dedicated to the memory of my father, Reggie Turner (1919-94). viii Pataphysics of the year 2000 A tormenting thought: as of a certain point, history was no longer real. Without noticing it, all mankind suddenly left reality; everything happening since then was supposedly not true; but we supposedly didn't notice. Our task ,would now be to find that point, and as long as we didn't have it, we would 'be forced to abide in our present destruction. Elias Canetti Various plausible hypotheses may be advanced to explain this vanishing of history. Canetti's expression 'all mankind suddenly left reality' irresistibly evokes the idea of that escape velocity a body requires to free itself from the gravitational field of a star or planet. Staying with this image, one might suppose that the acceleration of modernity, of technology, events and media, of all exchanges - economic, political and sexual - has propelled us to 'escape velocity', with the result that we have flown free of the referential sphere of the real and of history. We are 'liberated' in every sense of the term, so liberated that we have taken leave of a certain space-time, passed beyond a certain horizon in which the real is possible because gravitation is still strong enough for things to be reflected and thus in some way to endure and have some consequence. A degree of slowness (that is, a certain speed, but not too much), a degree of distance, but not too much, and a degree of liberation (an energy for rupture and change), but not too much, are needed to bring about the kind of condensation or significant crystallization of events we call history, the kind of coherent unfolding of causes and effects we call reality [le reel]. 1 PATAPHYSICS OF 1HE YEAR 2000 Once beyond this gravitational effect, which keeps bodies in orbit, all the atoms of meaning get lost in space. Each atom pursues its own trajectory to infinity and is lost in space. This is precisely what we are seeing in our present-day societies, intent as they are on accelerating all bodies, messages and processes in all directions and which, with modern media, have created for every event, story and image a simulation of an infinite trajectory. Every political, historical and cultural fact possesses a kinetic energy which wrenches it from its own space and propels it into a hyperspace where, since it will never return, it loses all meaning. No need for science fiction here: already, here and now - in the shape of our computers, circuits and networks - we have the particle accelerator which has smashed the referential orbit of things once and for all. So far as history is concerned, its telling has become impossible because that telling (re-citatum) is, by definition, the possible recurrence of a sequence of meanings. Now, through the impulse for total dissemination and circulation, every event is granted its own liberation; every fact becomes atomic, nuclear, and pursues its trajectory into the void. In order to be disseminated to infinity, it has to be fragmented like a particle. This is how it is able to achieve a velocity of no-return which carries it out of history once and for all. Every set of phenomena, ·whether cultural totality or sequence of events, has to be fragmented, disjointed, so that it can be sent down the circuits; every kind of language has to be resolved into a binary formulation so that it can circulate not, any longer, in our memories, but in the luminous, electronic memory of the computers. No human language can withstand the speed of light. No event can withstand being beamed across the whole planet. No meaning can withstand acceleration. No history can withstand the centrifugation of facts or their being short-circuited in real time (to pursue the same train of thought: no sexuality can withstand being liberated, no culture can withstand being hyped, no truth can withstand being verified, etc.). Nor is theory in a position to 'reflect (on)' anything. It can only tear concepts from their critical zone of reference and force them beyond a point of no-return (it too is moving into the hyperspace 2 PATAPHYSICS OF IBE YEAR 2000 ef simulation), a process whereby it loses all 'objective' validity but gains substantially in real affinity with the present system. The second hypothesis regarding the vanishing of history is the opposite of the first. It has to do not with processes speeding up but slowing down. It t o comes directly from physics. Matter slows the passing of time. To put it more precisely, time at the surface of a very dense body seems to be going in slow motion. The phenomenon intensifies as the density increases. The effect of this slowing down will be to increase the length of the light-wave emitted by this body as received by the observer. Beyond a certain limit, time stops and the wavelength becomes infinite. The wave no longer exists. The light goes out. There is a clear analogy here with the slowing down of history when it rubs up against the astral body of the 'silent majorities'. Our societies are dominated by this. mass process, not just in the demographic and sociological sense, but in the sense of a 'critical mass', of passing beyond a point of no-return. This is the most significant event within these societies: the emergence, in the very course of their mobilization and revolutionary process (they are all revolutionary by the standards of past centuries), of an equivalent force of inertia, of an immense indifference and the silent potency of that indifference. This inert matter of the social is not produced by a lack of exchanges, information or communi cation, but by the multiplication and saturation of exchanges. It is the product of the hyperdensity of cities, commodities, messages and circuits. It is the cold star of the social and, around that mass, history is also cooling. Even  follow one upon another, cancel ling each other out in a state of indifference. The masses, neutralized, mithridatized by information, in turn neutralize history and act as an ecran d'absorption.* They themselves have no history, meaning, consciousness or desire. They are the potential residue of all history, meaning and desire. As they have • The French is retained here, since to translate this by the English term 'dark trace screen' would be to forfeit the connection Baudrillard wishes to maintain with the idea of absorption. 3 PATAPHYSICS OF THE YEAR 2000 unfurled in our modernity, all these fine things have stirred up a mysterious counter-phenomenon, and all today's political and social strategies are thrown out of gear by the failure to understand it. This time we have the opposite situation: history, meaning and progress are no longer able to reach their escape velocity. They are no longer able to pull away from this overdense body which slows their trajectory, which slows time to the point where, right now, the perception and imagination of the future are beyond us. All social, historical and temporal transcendence is absorbed by that mass in its silent immanence. Political events already lack sufficient energy of their owp to move us: so they run on like a silent film for which we bear collective irresponsibility. History comes to an end here, not for want of actors, nor for want of violence (there will always be more violence), nor for want of events (there will always be more events, thanks be to the media and the news networks!}, but by deceleration, indifference and stupefaction.It is no longer able to transcend itself, to envisage its own finality, to dream of its own end; it is being buried beneath its own immediate effect, worn out in special effects, imploding into current events. Deep down, one cannot even speak of the end of history here, since history will not have time to catch up with its own end. Its effects are accelerating, but its meaning is slowing inexorably. It will eventually come to a stop and be extinguished like light and time in the vicinity of an infinitely dense mass ... Humanity too had its big bang: a certain critical density, a certain concentration of people and exchanges presides over this explo sion we call history, which is merely the dispersal of the dense and hieratic nuclei of previous civilizations. Today we have the reversive effect: crossing the threshold of the critical mass where populations, events and information are concerned triggers the opposite process of historical and political inertia. In the cosmic order, we do not know whether we have reached the escape velocity which would mean we are now in a definitive state of expansion (this will doubtless remain eternally uncertain). In the 4 PATAPHYSICS OF THE YEAR 2000 human order, where the perspectives are more limited, it may be that the very escape velocity of the species (the acceleration of births, technologies and exchanges over the centuries) creates an excess of mass and resistance which defeats the initial energy and takes us down an inexorable path of contraction and inertia. Whether the univ.erse is expanding to infinity or retracting towards an infinitely dense, infinitely small nucleus depends on its critical mass (and speculation on this is itself infinite by virtue of the possible invention of new particles). By analogy, whether our human history is evolutive or involutive perhaps depends on humanity's critical mass. Has the history, the movement, of the species reached the escape velocity required to triumph over the inertia of the mass? Are we set, like the galaxies, on a definitive course distancing us from one another at prodigious speed, or is this dispersal to infinity destined to come to an end and the human molecules to come back together by an opposite process of gravitation? Can the human mass, which increases every day, exert control over a pulsation of this kind? There is a third hypothesis, a third analogy.We are still speaking of a point of disappearance, a vanishing point, but this time in music.I shall call this the stereophonic effect.We are all obsessed with high fidelity, with the quality of musical 'reproduction'. At the consoles of our stereos, armed with our tuners, amplifiers and speakers, we mix, adjust settings, multiply tracks in pursuit of a flawless sound. Is this still music? Where is the high fidelity threshold beyond which music disappears as such? It does not disappear for lack of music, but because it has passed this limit point; it disappears into the perfection of its materiality, into its own special effect. Beyond this point, there is neither judgement nor aesthetic pleasure. It is the ecstasy of musicality, and its end. The disappearance of history is of the same 9rder: here again, we have passed that limit where, by dint of the sophistication of events and information, history ceases to exist as such.Immediate high-powered broadcasting, special effects, secondary effects, fading and that famous feedback effect which is produced in acoustics by a source and a receiver being too close together and 5 PATAPHYSICS OF THE YEAR 2000 in history by an event and its dissemination being too close together and thus interfering disastrously - a short-circuit between cause and effect like that between the object and the experimenting subject in microphysics (and in the human sciences!). These are all things which cast a radical doubt on the event, just as excessive high fidelity casts radical doubt on music. Elias Canetti puts it well: beyond this point, nothing is true. It is for this reason that the petite musique of history also eludes our grasp today, that it vanishes into the microscopies or the stereophonics of news. Right at the very heart of news, history threatens to disappear. At the heart of hi-fi, music threatens to disappear. At the heart of experimentation, the object of science threatens to disappear. At the heart of pornography, sexuality threatens to disappear. Everywhere we find the same stereophonic effect, the same effect of absolute proximity to the real, the same effect of simulation. By definition, this vanishing point, this point short of which history existed and music existed, cannot be pinned down. Where must stereo perfection end? The boundaries are constantly being pushed back because it is technical obsession which redraws them. Where must news reporting end? One can only counter this fascination with 'real time' - the equivalent of high fidelity - with a moral objection, and there is not much point in that. The passing of this point is thus an irreversible act, contrary to what Canetti seems to hope. We shall never get back to pre-stereo music (except by an additional technical simulation effect); we shall never get back to pre-news and pre-media history. The original essence of music, the original concept of history have disappeared because we shall never again be able to isolate them from their model of perfection which is at the same time their model of simulation, the model of their enforced assumption into a hyper-reality which cancels them out. We shall never again know what the social or music were before being exacerbated into their present useless perfection. We shall never again know what history was before its exacerbation into the technical perfection of news: we shall never again know what anything was before disappearing into the fulfilment of its model. 6 PATAPHYSICS OF TIIE YEAR 2000 So, with this, the situation becomes novel once again. The fact that we are leaving history to move into the realm of simulation is merely a consequence of the fact that history itself has always, deep down, been an immense simulation model. Not in the sense that it could be said only to have existed in the narrative made of it or the interpretation given, but with regard to the time in which it unfolds - that linear time .which is at once the time of an ending and of the unlimited suspending of the end. The only kind of time in which a history can take place, if, by history, we understand a succession of non-meaningless facts, each engendering the other by cause and effect, but doing so without any absolute necessity and all standing open to the future, unevenly poised. So different from time in ritual societies where the end of everything is in its beginning and ceremony retraces the perfection of that original event. In contrast to this fulfilled order of time, the liberation of the 'real' time of history, the production of a linear, deferred time may seem a purely artificial process. Where does this suspense come from? Where do we get the idea that what must be accomplished (Last Judgement, salvation or catastrophe) must come at the end of time and match up with some incalculable appointed term or other? This model of linearity must have seemed entirely fictitious, wholly absurd and abstract to cultures which had no sense of a deferred day of reckoning, a successive concatenation of events and a final goal. And it was, indeed, a scenario which had some difficulty establishing itself. There was fierce resistance in the early years of Christianity to the postpone ment of the coming of God's Kingdom. The acceptance of this 'historical' perspective of salvation, that is, of its remaining unaccomplished in the immediate present, was not achieved without violence, and all the heresies would later take up this leitmotif of the immediate fulfilment of the promise in what was akin to a defiance of time. Entire communities even resorted to suicide to hasten the coming of the Kingdom. Since this latter was promised at the end of time, it seemed to them that they had only to put an end to time right away. The whole of history has had a millennial (millenarian) challenge to its temporality running through it. In opposition to 7 PATAPHYSICS OF THE YEAR 2000 the historical perspective, which continually shifts the stakes on. to a hypothetical end, there has always been a fatal exigency, a fatal strategy of time which wants to shoot straight ahead to a point beyond the end. It cannot be said that either of these tendencies has really won out, and the question 'to wait or not to wait?' has remained, throughout history, a burning issue. Since the messianic convulsion of the earliest Christians, reaching back beyond the heresies and revolts, there has always been this desire to anticipate the end, possibly by death, by a kind of seductive suicide aiming to turn God from history and make him face up to his responsibilities, those which lie beyond the end, those of the final fulfilment. And what, indeed, is terrorism, if not this effort to conjure up, in its own way, the end of history? It attempts to entrap the powers that be by an immediate, total act. Without awaiting the final term of the process, it sets itself at the ecstatic end-point, hoping to bring about the conditions for the Last Judgement. An illusory challenge, of course, but one which always fascinates, since, deep down, neither time nor history has ever been accepted. Everyone remains aware of the arbitrariness, the artificial character of time and history. And we are never fooled by those who call on us to hope. And, terrorism apart, is there not also a hint of this parousic exigency in the global fantasy of catastrophe that hovers over today's world? A demand for a violent resolution of reality, when this latter eludes our grasp in an endless hyper-reality? For hyper reality rules out the very occurrence of the Last Judgement or the Apocalypse or the Revolution. All the ends we have envisaged elude our grasp and history has no chance of bringing them about, since it will, in the interim, have come to an end (it's always the story of Kafka's Messiah: he arrives too late, a day too late, and the time-lag is unbearable). So one might as well short circuit the Messiah, bring forward the end. This has always been the demonic temptation: to falsify ends and the calculation of ends, to falsify time and the occurrence of things, to hurry them along, impatient to see them accomplished, or secretly sensing that the promise of accomplishment is itself also false and diabolical. Even our obsession with 'real time', with the instantaneity of 8 PATAPHYSICS OF THE YEAR 2000 news, has a secret millenarianism about it: cancelling the flow of time, cancelling delay, suppressing the sense that the event is happening elsewhere, anticipating its end by freeing ourselves from linear time, laying hold of things almost before they have taken place. In this sense, 'real time' is something even more artificial than a recording, and is, at the same time, its denial - if we want immediate enjoyment of the event, if we want to experience it at the instant of its occurrence, as if we were there, this is because we no longer have any confidence in the meaning or purpose of the event. The same denial is found in apparently opposite behaviour - recording, filing and memorizing everything of our own past and the past of all cultures. Is this not a symptom of a collective presentiment of the end, a sign that events and the living time of history have had their day and that we have to arm ourselves with the whole battery of artificial memory, all the signs of the past, to face up to the absence of a future and the glacial times which await us? Are not mental and intellectual structures currently going underground, burying themselves in memories, in archives, in search of an improbable resurrection? All thoughts are going underground in cautious anticipation of the year 2000. They can already scent the terror of the year 2000. They are instinctively adopting the solution of those cryogenized indi viduals plunged into liquid nitrogen until the means can be found to enable them to survive. These societies, these generations which no longer expect anything from some future 'comil}g', and have less and less confidence in history, which dig in behind their futuristic technologies, behind their stores of information and inside the beehive networks of communication where time is at last wiped out by pure circulation, will perhaps never reawaken. But they do not know that. The year 2000 will not perhaps take place. But they do not know that. 9 The reversal of history At some point in the 1980s, history took a tum in the opposite direction. Once the apogee of time, the summit of the curve of evolution, the solstice of history had been passed, the downward slope of events began and things began to run in reverse. It seems that, like cosmic space, historical space-time is also curved. By the same chaotic effect in time as in space, things go quicker and quicker as they approach their term, just as water mysteriously accelerates as it approaches a waterfall. In the Euclidean space of history, the shortest path between two points is the straight line, the line of Progress and Democracy. But this is only true of the linear space of the Enlightenment. In our non-Euclidean fin de siecle space, a baleful curvature unfailingly deflects all trajectories. This is doubtless linked to the sphericity of time (visible on the horizon of the end of the century, just as the earth's sphericity is visible on the horizon at the end of the day) or the subtle distortion of the gravitational field. Segalen says that once the Earth has become a sphere, every movement distancing us from a point by the same token also begins to bring us closer to that point. This is true of time as well. Each apparent movement of history brings us imperceptibly closer to its antipodal point, if not indeed to its starting point. This is the end of linearity. In this perspective, the future no 10 TI-IE REVERSAL OF HISTORY longer exists. But if there is no longer a future, there is no longer an end either. So this is.. not even the end of history. We are faced with a paradoxical process of reversal, a reversive effect of modernity which, having reached its speculative limit and extrapolated all its virtual developments, i  disintegrating into its simple elements in a catastrophic process of recurrence and turbulence. By this retroversion of history to infinity, this hyperbolic curvature, the century itself is escaping its end. By this retroaction of events, we are eluding our own deaths. Metaphorically, then, we shall not even reach the symbolic term of the end, the symbolic term of the year 2000. Can one escape this curving back of history which causes it to retrace its own steps and obliterate its own tracks, escape this fatal asymptote which causes us, as it were, to rewind modernity like a tape? We are so used to playing back every film - the fictional ones and the films of our lives - so contaminated by the technology of retrospection, that we are quite capable, in our present dizzy spin, of running history over again like a film played backwards. Are, we condemned, in the vain hope of not abiding in our present destruction, as Canetti has it, to the retrospective melancholia of living everything through again in order to correct it all, in order to elucidate it all (it is almost as though psychoanalysis were spreading its shadow over the whole of our history: when the same events, the same conjunctures are reproduced in almost the same terms, when the same wars break out between the same peoples, and all that had passed and gone re-emerges as though driven by an irrepressible phantasm, one might almost see this as the work of a form of primary process or unconscious), do we have to summon all past events to appear before us, to reinvestigate it all as though we were conducting a trial? A mania for trials has taken hold of us in recent times, together with a mania for responsibility, precisely at the point when this latter is becoming increasingly hard to pin down. We are looking to remake a clean history, to whitewash all the 11 THE REVERSAL·OF HISTORY abominations: the obscure (resentful) feeling behind the pro.. liferation of scandals is -that history. itself is a scandal. A retroprocess which may drag us into a mania for origins, going back even beyond history, back to the conviviality of animal existence, to the primitive biotope, as can already be seen in the ecologists' flirtation with an impossible origin. The only way of escaping this, of breaking with this recession and obsession, would seem to be to set ourselves, from the outset, on a different temporal orbit, to leapfrog our shadows, leapfrog the shadow of the century, to take an elliptical short-cut and pass beyond the end, not allowing it time to take place. The advantage is that we would at least preserve what remains of history, instead of subjecting it to an agonizing revision, and deliver it up to those who will carry out the post-mortem on its corpse, as one carries out a post-mortem on one's childhood in an interminable analysis. This would at least mean conserving its memory and its glory, whereas currently, in the guise of revision and rehabili tation, we are cancelling out one by one all the events which have preceded us by obliging them to repent. If we could escape this end-of-century moratorium, with its deferred day of reckoning, which looks curiously like a work of mourning - a failed one - and which consists in reviewing everything, rewriting everything, restoring everything, face-lifting everything, to produce, as it seems, in a burst of paranoia a perfect set of accounts at the end of the century, a universally positive balance sheet (the reign of human rights over the whole planet, democracy everywhere, the definitive obliteration of all conflict and, if possible, the obliteration of all 'negative' events from our memories), if we could escape this international cleaning and polishing effort in which all the nations of the world can be seen vying today, if we could spare ourselves this democratic extreme unction by which the New World Order is heralded, we would at least allow the events which have preceded us to· retain their glory, character, meaning and singularity. Whereas we seem in such a hurry to cover up the worst before the bankruptcy proceedings start (everyone is secretly afraid of the terrifying balance sheet we are going to present in the year 2000) 12 TIIE REVERSAL OF HISTORY that there will be nothing left of our history at the end of the millennium, nothing of its illumination, of the violence of its events. If there is something distinctive about an event - about what constitutes an event and thus has historical value - it is the fact that it is irreversible, that there is always something in it which exceeds nieaning and interpretation. But it is precisely the opposite we are seeing today: all that has happened this century in terms of progress, liberation, revolution and violence is about to be revised for the better. This is the problem: is the course of modernity reversible, and is that reversal itself irreversible? How far can this retrospective form go, this end-of-millennium dream? Is there not a 'history barrier', analogous to the sound or speed barrier, beyond which, in its palinodical movement, it could not pass? 13 The ascent of the vacuum towards the periphery On the eve of the 1990s, in the midst of some unexpected events and with an eye to others just as unpredictable, there formed, among a number of friends, the idea of an agency which would itself be invisible, anonymous and clandestine: the Stealth Agency. This could equally well be called: ANATHEMATIC ILLIMITED TRANSFATAL EXPRESS VIRAL INCORPORATED INTERNATIONAL EPIDEMICS* As an agency for gathering news of unreal events in order to disinform the public of them, it remained, itself, unreal. It thus fulfilled its role perfectly, eluding all radar screens - a formula unique and forever virtual. Implied in this Agency was the point that there are no longer any ideas grappling with facts - that was the 'Utopia' of the 1960s and 1970s - no longer really any actors grappling with events, nor intellectuals grappling with their meaning, but a storm • All the terms in capitals are in English in the original. 14 TIIE ASCENT OF TIIE VACUUM of events of no importance, without either real actors or authorized interpreters: actio has disappeared at the same moment as auctoritas. All that remains is actualite, 'action' in the cinematographic sense, and 'auction', the selling-off of the event on the overheated news market. The event captured not, as it used to be, in action, but in speculation and chain reactions spinning off towards the extremes of a facticity with which interpretation can no longer keep pace. Simulation is precisely this irresistible unfolding, this sequenc ing of things as though they had a meaning, when they are governed only by artificial montage and non-meaning. Putting the event up for auction by radical disinformation. Setting a price on the event, as against setting it in play, setting it in history. If there are any historical stakes, they remain secret, enigmatic; they are resolved in events which do not really take place. And I am not referring here to ordinary events, but to the events of Eastern Europe, the Gulf War, etc. Now, the aim of the Agency was precisely to set up against this simulation a radical desimulation or, in other words, to lift the veil on the fact of events not taking place. And thus to make itself secret and enigmatic in their image, to get through to a certain void, a certain non-meaning, by contrast with the media, which are frantic to plug up all the gaps. To move within the void of events like Chuang Tzu's butcher in the interstitial void of the body.* Admittedly, this kind of sly, surreptitious intervention on the side of the void against the grotesque, Ubuesque infatuation with news and the political scene was merely a< dream and, by dint of being secret and enigmatic, no more came into being, in the end, than did the events themselves. It fell into the same black hole, the same virtual space, as the non-events of which it was to speak ,(secretly, unbeknown to everyone, while remaining operational, exactly like these new style events which are only events to the extept that they are " In English translations of Chuang Tzu (Zhuang Zi), this figure is often identified as a 'cook'. Thomas Merton's translation contains the following lines: 'Guided by natural line,/By the secret opening, the hidden space,/My cleaver finds its own way.fl cut through no joint, chop no bone' (The Way of Chuang Tzu, London: Unwin, 1970, p. 46). 15 THE ASCENT OF THE VACUUM media events). An apparently irresolvable paradox. But the idea is not dead. The Stealth Agency chimed in with events being on strike, with history being on strike. Like history, it was a consumer of absent events, attempting to give the most precise non-information about that absence of events, that indefinite sit-in strike in which history - the empty space over which the spectres of Power still hover - was occupied, just as workers might occupy a factory - that empty space of Labour, over which the spectre of Capital still hovers. It is as though events passed on the strike call to each other. One after the other they deserted their time, transforming it into an empty actualite where only the visual psychodrama of news was left to unfold. And this event strike led to history being locked out. The fact that it is no longer the event that generates news, but the reverse, has incalculable consequences, as the whole travail du negatif disappears on the horizon of the media, exactly as work disappears on the horizon of capital. Here again, the relations are inverted: it is no longer work that serves the reproduction of capital, but capital which produces and repro duces work. A gigantic parody of the relations of production. This disruption of cause and effect is not now the work of the critical consciousness, but of objective irony alone. Thus it was the Agency's duty not only to avoid the temptation of providing information on the events which had 'downed tools', but also to avoid appending a critical commentary to them, in order to capture the originality of this non-event, which is the originality of an objective irony. For the radical irony of our history is that things no longer really take place, while nonetheless seeming to. This is the opposite of the traditional ruse of history which brought about changes that were crucial but did not appear to be so. When you think that we took the events in Eastern Europe at face value, with their good, sound coin of f,reedom and 'democra tic values', and the Gulf War, with its Human Rights and New World Order! These events were auctioned off well above their 16 THE ASCENT OF THE VACUUM value. The historical. scene today is like the art market. Against this speculative inflation, which leaves everyone on edge - that is, both overexcited and indifferent, riveted and apathetic - against these gidouille events, worthy of the Grande Gidouille of History,* we had to find an ironic form of the disruption of information, a casual form of writing to match the casual evenementialite of our age, together with a subtly catastrophic form which fits with the coming of the end of the century. We had to find, in this event strike, the thread running through, which is that of deterrence, the baleful form which presides over the nullity of our age. Deterrence is a very peculiar form of action: it is what causes something not to take place. It dominates the whole of our contemporary period, which tends not so much to produce events as to cause something not to occur, while looking as though it is a historical event. Or else events do take place in the stead of some other event which did not. War, history, reality and passion - deterrence plays its part in all these. It causes strange events to take place(!), events which do not in any way advance history, but rather run it backwards, back along the opposite slope, unintelligible to our historical sense (only things which move in the direction of history [le sens de l'histoire] have historical meaning [sens historique]), events which no longer have a negative (progressive, critical or revolutionary) potency since their only negativity is in the fact of their not taking place. Disturbing. The· hold deterrence has on us even extends to the past. It can remove all certainty about facts and evidence. It can destabilize memory just as it destabilizes prediction. It is a diabolical force which wrecks the actual acting out of events or, if they still take place - if they have taken place - destroys their credibility. Perhaps this curvature of things which deJ? rives them of meaning or linear end is merely a depression in the meteorologi- * The gidouille here is the great belly or paunch of Jarry's Pere Ubu, which has acquired a broader s'ense in French 'pataphysical' usage. On its origins and signification, see', for example, Keith Beaumont, Alfred Jarry: A Critical and Biographical Study, Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1984. 17 THE ASCENT OF THE VACUUM cal sense of the term - the emptiness we feel being the effect not of a failing of meaning or memory, but of a strange attraction coming from elsewhere. Perhaps the atony, the catatonia we are experiencing is to be interpreted in the opposite sense, not as a void left by the ebbing of past events, but a void due to the suction effect of a future event, to the anticipatory sucking up by a nearby mass of all the oxygen we breathe, creating a violent depressurizing of the social, political, cultural and mental sphere. A pataphysical hypothesis, that of anti-gravity, anti-density - of a science of imaginary solutions rising above physics and metaphysics. In his Exploits and Opinions of Dr Faustroll, Jarry sketches the contours of this strange attraction, brought about by overturning the principles of physics: 'Current science is based on the principle of induction: most people have seen a certain phenomenon most often precede or follow some other phenome non and conclude therefrom that this will always be the case . . . But, instead of formulating the law of the fall of a body towards 'a centre, why not give preference to that of the ascent of a vacuum towards a periphery, the vacuum being considered a unit of non density, a hypothesis far less arbitrary than the choice of a concrete unit of positive density.' Inverse attraction by the void, rather than attraction of solids by other solids. Perhaps it is this which gives our events this particular coloration, this flavour (or, rather, insipidity) of emptiness, this inanity. Even as they occur, they might already be 'vanishing events  - of little meaning because already heading towards the void. Running counter to the old physics of meaning would be a new gravitation - the true, the only gravitation: attraction by the void. Doubtless the most basic of natural laws. This would explain quite a number of anomalies, including those in the realrns of the mind and the 'psychological' field. So, our forms of action and mobility are not so much a matter of positive drives as of expulsion and repulsion. The centrifugal mobility of particles seeking to escape from density and join up with what? A mysterious periphery of space, an anti-gravity. Thus it would be possible to escape from the heavy form, the 18 THE ASCENT OF THE VACUUM gravity of 'desire', conceived as positive attraction, by the much more subtle eccentricity of seduction, which would be, to take up again some old cosmogonies that were not without their charm, the last-gasp escape from the body of molecules that are much too light and know only one line of flight - towards the void (so it is with poetic language, where each particle finds its resolution in anagrammatical resonance). We may say of the new events that they hollow out before them the void into which they plunge. They are intent, it seems, on one thing alone - being forgotten. They leave hardly any scope for interpretation, except for all interpretations at once, by which they evade any desire to give them meaning and elude the heavy attraction of a continuous history to enter upon the light orbit of a discontinuous one. They arrive - mostly unforeseen - more quickly than their shadows, but they have no sequel. Meteoric events, of the same chaotic inconsequence as cloud formations. So, with the events of Eastern Europe, for example, we have the impression of a long negative accumulation and a sudden resolution, like the obvious, instant conclusion to operations which elude our understanding. In these conditions, such events, which are nonetheless important, have the strange aftertaste of something that has already happened before, something unfold ing retrospectively - an aftertaste which does not bode well for a meaningful future. Our only surprise is that we were not able to foresee them and our only regret that we do not know how to draw any consequences from them. The screen of history fluctuates at the same irregular rhythm as natural phenomena. One has the impression that events form all on their own and drift unpredictably towards their vanishing point - the peripheral void of the media. Just as physicists now see their particles only as a trajectory on a screen, we no longer have the pulsing of events, but only the cardiogram, have neither representation nor recollec tion of them, but merely the (flat) encephalogram, neither desire nor enjoyment of them, but only the psychodrama and the TV image. It is a bit like in vitro procreation: the embryo of the real event 19 TIIE ASCENT OF TIIE VACUUM is transferred into the artificial womb of the news media, there to give birth to many orphaned foetuses which have neither fathers nor mothers. The event is entitled to the- same procreative practices as birth and the same euthanasian practices as death. It is to this perhaps that we owe this 'fun physics' effect: the impression that events, collective or individual, have been bundled into a memory hole. This blackout is due, no doubt, to this movement of reversal, this parabolic curvature of historical space. For the past can only be represented and reflected if it pushes us in the other direction, towards a future of some kind. Retrospection is dependent on a prospection which enables us to refer to something .as past and gone, and thus as having really taken place. If, by some strange revolution, we set off in the opposite direction and turn inwards into this dimension of the past, then we can no longer represent that something to ourselves. The beam of memory bends, and makes every event a black hole. We experience this subjectively too, in the sudden loss of our memories, the break in the continuity of names, faces and familiar forms. In this kind of catastrophic memory failure, there is neither natural forgetting nor unconscious repression. It is the inversion of the temporal field of gravity which means that the signs of the past no longer have sufficient specific mass, sufficient nuclear mass to hold them, nor the mirror of the present enough to reflect them. The memory gaps are a little bit like the holes in the ozone layer, the holes into which our protective screen i  breaking up. But perhaps they are not big enough for what falls into them to begin to spin, releasing .the light particles from the heavy, widening and deepening the black hole through which the dead bodies will release their ethereal substance, as in Dante or Giordano Bruno. It is in the absolute void that the absolute event occurs. So the void must only have been relative, since death has remained virtual. 20 The event strike What has been lost is the glory of the event, what Benjamin would term its aura. For centuries, the keynote of history was glory, a very powerful illusion and one which played on the everlasting nature of time, in that it was inherited from one's ancestors and would be handed on to one's descendants. That passion seems laughable today. Whereas, in the past, the aim was to lose oneself in something prodigious, to achieve the 'immortality' Hannah Arendt speaks of, which had a trans cendence equal to that of God (glory and salvation long contended for the souls of men, like passion and compassion, those rivals before the Eternal), what we seek now is not glory but identity, not an illusion but, on the contrary, an accumulation of proofs - anything that can serve as evidence of a historical existence. The prodigious event, the event which is measured neither by its causes nor its consequences but creates its own stage and its own dramatic effect, no longer exists. History has gradually narrowed down to the field of its probable causes and effects, and, even more recently, to the field of current events - its effects 'in real time'. Events now have no more significance than their anticipated meaning, their programming and their broadcasting. Only this event strike constitutes a true historical phenomenon - this refusal to signify anything whatever, or this capacity to 21 THE EVENf STRIKE signify anything at all. This is the true end of history, the end of historical Reason. But it would be too much to hope that we had finished with history. For it is possible not only that history has disappeared (the travail du negatif, political reason, the prestige of the event have all gone), but also that we still have to fuel its end. It is entirely as though we were still continuing to manufacture history, whereas, in accumulating the signs of the social, the signs of the political, the signs of progress and change, we are merely feeding the end of history. While history, cannibalistic and necrophagous, constantly calls for new victims, for new events, so as to be done with them a little bit more. Socialism is a fine example of this. It is to socialism that it will have fallen, by the collapse of the historical reason it claimed to embody, to manage the end of history, to fuel the end. We used to ask what might come after the orgy - mourning or melancholia? Doubtless neither, but an interminable clean-up of all the vicissitudes of modern history and its processes of liberation (of peoples, sex, dreams, art and the unconscious - in short, of all that makes up the orgy of our times), in an atmosphere dominated by the apocalyptic presentiment that all this is coming to an end. Rather than pressing forward and taking flight into the future, we prefer the retrospective apocalypse, and a blanket revisionism. Our societies have all become revisionistic: they are quietly rethinking everything, laundering their political crimes, their scandals, licking their wounds, fuelling their ends. Celebration and commemoration are themselves merely the soft form of necrophagous cannibalism, the homeopathic form of murder by easy stages. This is the work of the heirs, whose ressentiment towards the deceased is boundless. Museums, jubilees, festivals, complete works, the publication of the tiniest of unpublished fragments - all this shows that we are entering an active age of ressentiment and repentance. Acts of glorification and commemoration clearly form part of this collective flagellation. We are particularly well served in France: our public life has been overtaken by a veritable ritual of 22 THE EVENT STRIKE mourning and condolence. And all our monuments are mauso leums: the Pyramid, the Arch at La Defense, the Musee d'Orsay, that fine Pharaonic chamber, the new National Library, cenotaph of culture. Not counting the Revolution, which is a monument in itself, the bicentenary of which was the finest simulation of an event to be seen at the end of the century. There are two forms of forgetting: on the one hand, the slow or violent extermination of memory, on the other, the spectacular promotion of a phenomenon, shifting it from historical space into the sphere of advertising, the media becoming the site of a temporal strategy of prestige . . . This is how we have manu factured for ourselves, with great swathes of promotional images, a synthetic memory which serves as our primal reference, our founding myth, and which, most importantly, absolves us of the real event of Revolution. 'Revolution is not on the agenda in France because the Great Revolution occurred and has served as an example for all others over two centuries . . . Our entire aim in present-day France is to ensure that there will be no revolution' (Louis Mermaz). This is how it is: it happened, it is finished, it will never happen again. The whole of our system is based on this negative anticipation. Not only are we no longer able to produce a new history, we are not even able to ensure its symbolic reproduction. We build an opera house at the Bastille. A laughable rehabilitation: royal music is to be served up there to the people. Yet it is not the people who will benefit. It is the cultural elite who will go there, confirming the rule that the privileged are happy to hallow with art and pleasure the places where others died. Might one suggest to the people that they storm the opera house and tear it down on the symbolic date of 14 July? Might one suggest that they parade the bloody heads of our modern cultural governors on the end of pikestaffs? But we no longer make history. We have become reconciled with it and protect it like an endangered masterpiece. Times have changed. We have today a perfectly pious vision of the Revolu tion, cast in terms of the Rights of Man. Not even a nostalgic vision, but one recycled in the terms of post-modern intellectual 23 THE EVENT STRIKE comfort. A vision which allows us to eliminate Saint-Just from the Dictionnaire de la Revolution. 'Overrated rhetoric', says Fran<tois Furet, perfect historian of the repentance of the Terror and of glory. There are those who let the dead bury their dead, and there are those who are forever digging them up to finish them off. Having failed both in their symbolic murder and their work of mourning, it is not enough for them that others should be dead; they have to disinter them once again to impale them - this is the Carpentras complex (after the Timi§oara complex: the faking of corpses for TV), the desecration complex. Nothing lends itself so well to this operation as the centenary of a death. With Rimbaud, Van Gogh and Nietzsche, 1991 will have been exceptional in terms of vile acts of desecration. One can see a kind of suicidal behaviour in this compulsion on the part of the cultural and intellectual elite to exalt thinkers who have only scorn for that elite and are its living condemnation: Celine, Artaud, Bataille, Nietzsche. Might this ·be a product of one of those failures of instinct which the last-mentioned diagnosed more than a century ago - a failure which character izes a species doomed by its inability to judge what is good for it? If the left were a species, and culture obeyed the laws of natural selection, it would have disappeared long ago. Flirting with what is implacably opposed to it, dying from a total contradiction between its critical thinking and its action, attempting to reconcile its critical subconscious and its presence in power by turning culture into a mode of government. These things are all part and parcel, already, of the forms of repentance. It isn't just terrorists who repent. Intellectuals showed them the way, the Sartreans and others having been in the van of repentance from the 1950s onwards. Today, the whole century is repenting, class (or race) repentance everywhere predominating over class pride and consciousness. It is the sign that the century is becoming intellectualized. It is becoming intellectual today just as it became bourgeois a century ago. And the term 'intellectual' 24 THE EVENT STRIKE will one day disappear, just as the word 'bourgeois' - which now exposes only the person who uses it to ridicule - has disappeared. The auto-dissolution common to both West and East is visible in the deterioration of the structures of power and representation (thus, the more the political sphere becomes intellectualized, the more it secretly denies its own will to govern, and this ressentiment towards itself is the source of all corruption). But it can also be seen in the multiple strategies for re-enchanting values, cultures and differences.We expend all the energy of that dissolution in resisting our own end, which we can then neither enjoy nor be engulfed by. A gigantic night of the fourth of August* would be preferable, a great night of the Rights of Man, on which the whole of humanity would renounce those rights as the aristocrats once renounced their privileges, and the renunci ation would take on excessive dimensions. What can occur to rescue us from endlessly trawling over our own culture? It seems we are condemned to the infinite retrospective of all that has preceded us.What is true of politics and morality seems true of art also.The whole drift of painting has withdrawn from the future and shifted towards the past. Present-day art is currently reappropriating the works of the - distant, recent or even contemporary - past. This is what Russell Connor calls the 'abduction of modern art'.t Now, admittedly, this reappropri ation is supposed to be ironic. But the humour here is merely the transparent invocation of humour. Like the worn threads of a piece of fabric, it is an irony produced only by the disillusion of things, a fossilized irony.The little trick of placing the nude from Manet's Dejeuner sur l'herbe opposite Cezanne's Card Players, as one might put an admiral's hat on a monkey, is nothing more than the advertising-style irony currently !!ngulfj.ng the world of art. It is the irony of repentance and ressentiment towards one's * A reference to the date in 1789 on which the nobles gave up their feudal rights. Not only was this in itself, as Simon Schama remarks, 'a bonfire of particularisms', it also ushered in what he describes as 'a cult of self dispossdsion' (Citizens, London, 1989, p. 439). t This expression has been retranslated from the French exhibition catalogue in which the author encountered it. 25 THE EVENT STRIKE own culture. No doubt repentance and ressentiment constitute the last stage of the history of art, just as, according to Nietzsche, they constitute the last stage of the genealogy of morals. It. is a parody, or rather a palinode, of art and the history of art (a development reflecting that of history tout court) - a parody of culture by culture itself as an act of vengeance, characteristic of radical disillusionment. It is as though history were rifling through its own dustbins and looking for redemption in the rubbish. The end of history is, alas, also the end of the dustbins of history. There are no longer any dustbins even for disposing of ol& ideologies, old regimes, old values. Where are we going to throw Marxism, which actually invented the dustbins of history? (Yet, there is some justice here since the very people who invented them have fallen in.) Conclusion: if there are no more dustbins of history, this is because History itself has become a dustbin. It has become its own dustbin. Just as the planet itself is becoming its own dustbin. When ice freezes, all the excrement rises to the surface. And so, when the dialectic was frozen, all the sacred excrement of the dialectic came to the surface. When the future is deep-frozen - and, indeed, even the present - we see all the excrement come up from the past. The problem then becomes one of waste. It is not just material substances, including nuclear ones, ·which pose a waste problem but also the defunct ideologies, bygone utopias, dead concepts and fossilized ideas which continue to pollute our mental space. Historical and intellectual refuse pose an even more serious problem than industrial waste. Who will rid us of the sedimen tation of centuries of stupidity? As for history - that living lump of waste, that dying monster which, like the corpse in Ionesco,* continues to swell after it has died - how are we to be rid of it? The ecological imperative is that all wastes must be recycled. Otherwise, they will circle endlessly like satellites around the ,. A reference to Ionesco's Amedee, ou comment s'en debarrasser. 26 THE EVENT STRIKE earth, which has itself returned to the state of a lump of cosmic waste. What is happening with history is the foreshadowing of this dilemma: we can either perish under the weight of the non degradable waste of the great empires, the grand narratives, the great systems made obsolete by their own gigantism, or else recycle all this waste in the synthetic form of a heteroclite history, as we are doing today in the name of Democracy and Human Rights, which are never anything but the confused end-product of the reprocessing of all the residues of history - crusher residues in which all the ethnic, linguistic, feudal and ideological phantoms of earlier societies float. Amnesia, anamnesis, the anachronistic revival of all the figures.-0f the past - royalty, feudalism. Though did they ever really disappear? Democracy itself (a proliferating form, the lowest common denominator of all our liberal societies), this planetary democracy of the Rights of Man, is to real freedom what Disneyland is to the imaginary. In relation to the modern demand for freedom, it offers the same characteristics as recycled paper. There is in fact no insoluble waste problem. The problem is resolved by the post-modern invention of recycling and the incinerator. The Great Incinerators of history, from whose ashes the Phoenix of post-modernity is resuscitated! We have to come to terms with the idea that everything that was not degradable or exterminable is today recyclable, and hence that there is no final solution. We shall not be spared the worst - that is, History will not come ta an end - since the leftovers, all the leftovers - the Church, communism, ethnic groups, conflicts, ideologies - are indefinitely recyclable. What is stupendous is that nothing one thought superseded by history has really disappeared. All the archaic, anachronistic forms are there ready to re-emerge, intact and timeless, like the viruses deep in the body. History has only wrenched itself from cyclical time to fall into the order of the recyclable. 27 The thawing of the East Hooray, history is back from the dead! The great event of the end of the century is under way. Everyone can breathe again at the idea that history, stifled for a time in the grip of totalitarian ideology, is resuming its course with renewed vigour now that the blockade on the countries of Eastern Europe has been lifted. The field of history is at last opened up again to the unpredictable bustle of peoples and their thirst for freedom. In contrast to the depressive mythology which generally accompanies the ends of centuries, it seems this one is to usher in a new and illustrious resurgence of the final process, to bring fresh hope and a revival of all historical challenges. AW?-Y with all those evil auguries of the end of history. How can its reality and vitality be doubted when such events are taking place before our eyes? Seen at closer quarters, the event is a bit more mysterious, and might with much greater accuracy be described as an unidentified 'historical' object.This thawing of the Eastern bloc, this thawing of liberty is certainly an extraordinary turn of events. But what becomes of liberty when it is defrosted? The operation is a perilous one and its outcome uncertain (even leaving aside the fact that what has been defrosted cannot be deep-frozen again). The USSR and the Eastern bloc have not just served as a deep freeze for freedom; they have also provided a testing ground, an 28 Tiffi 1HAWING OF Tiffi EAST experimental environment in which it was isolated and subjected to very high pressures. The West, for its part, is little more than a repository or, more accurately, a dumping ground for freedom and human rights. If ultra-freezing was the distinctive - and negative - mark of the Eastern world, the ultra-fluidity of our Western world is even more disreputable since, as a consequence of the liberation and liberalization of mores and opinions, the problem of liberry quite simply cannot be posed here any longer. It is virtually over and done with. In the West, freedom - the Idea of Freedom - has died a natural death: this we have seen in all the recent commemorations. In the East it was murdered, but there is no such thing as the perfect crime. It will be very interesting, from an experimental point of view, to see what freedom is like when it resurfaces, when it is resuscitated after all sign of it had been blotted out. We shall see what a process of reanimation or post mortem rehabilitation looks like. Perhaps defrosted liberty is not so attractive as all that. And what if it turned out to be intent on just one thing: bartering itself off in a binge of cars and electrical goods, not to mention mind-bending drugs and pornography; that is, immediately trading itself off against Western liquid assets, switching over from an end of history by deep-freezing to an end of history by ultra-fluidity and circulation ? Because the enthralling thing about these events in Eastern, Europe is not to see them meekly coming to the aid of an ailing democracy by bringing it fresh energy (and new markets), but to see the telescoping of two specific patterns of the end of history: the one where it ends deep-frozen in the concentration camps and the other where, by contrast, it ends in the total, centrifugal expansion of communication. In each case, it is a final solution. And it may be that the thawing of human rights is the socialist equivalent of the 'depressurizing of the West': a mere discharge into the Western void of the energies trapped for half a century in the East. The fervour surrounding events can be deceptive: if that of the Eastern bloc countries is merely an ardent desire to be free of ideology, merely a fervent desire to imitate the free-market 29 THE THAWING OF THE EAST countries, where all liberty has already been exchanged for technological ease of living, then we shall see once and for all what freedom is worth and know it cannot perhaps ever be regained. History serves up no second helpings. On the other hand - and this is the unpredictable part for us, for the West (after all, when the Evil Empire collapses Good cannot remain exactly as it was before!) - this thaw in the East may be as harmful in the long term as the excess of carbon gases in the upper layers of the atmosphere, creating a political greenhouse effect and such a warming of human relations on the planet, with the melting of the communist ice-floes, that the shores of the West will be flooded. Curiously, whereas we dread the climatic melting of ice-floes and see it as representing a potential catastrophe, as democrats, we long with all our might for such a thaw on the political front. If, in the old days, the USSR had dumped its stock of gold on the world market, that market would have been completely destabilized. If the Eastern bloc countries were to put back into circulation the vast stock of freedom they have been keeping oh ice, they would similarly destabilize the very fragile metabolism of Western values, which requires that freedom no longer manifest itself as action but as a virtual and consensual form of interaction, not as drama, but as the universal psychodrama of liberalism. A sudden injection of freedom as a lived relationship - as violent and active transcendence, as Idea - would be catastrophic in every way for our air-conditioned redistribution of values. Yet this is what we are asking of those in the East: the idea of freedom in exchange for the material signs of freedom. A perfectly diabolical pact, in which one side is in danger of losing its soul, the other its comfort. The masked societies (the communist societies) are now unmasked. What face do they present? We shed our masks long ago and it is a long time since we had either masks or faces. We have no memory either. We have reached the point of seeking in water a memory without traces, of hoping (I here crave Benveniste's indulgence) that something still remains when even 30 THE THAWING OF THE EAST the molecular traces have disappeared.* It is the same with our freedom: we would be hard pressed to produce any sign of it and we have reached the point of postulating its infinitesimal, impalpable, undetectable existence in a milieu of such high (programmatic, operational) dilution that only its spectre still hovers across our memories. The wellspring of freedom has run so dry in the West (as witness the commemoration of the French Revolution) that we must place all our hopes in the East European deposits that have at last been uncovered and opened up. But once this stock of liberty has been released (the Idea of Liberty having become as scarce as a natural resource), what can ensue but, as on any market, an intense, superficial burst of trading, followed by a rapid collapse of differential energies and asset values. What is the meaning of glasnost? The retrospective trans parency of all the signs of modernity, speeded up and second hand (it is almost a post-modern remake of our original version of modernity) - of all the positive and negative signs combined: that is, not just human rights, but crimes, catastrophes and accidents which are, it seems, all joyously increasing in the ex-' USSR since the liberalization of the regime. And even the rediscovery of ,pornography and extra-terrestrials, all previously censored, but celebrating their reappearance along with every thing else. This is the experimental dimension of this general thaw: we can now see that crimes and catastrophes, both nuclear and natural, along with everything else that has been repressed, are all part of our human rights (the religious sphere too, of course, and fashion; indeed, nothing is debarred) - and this is a fine object lesson in democracy. For we see re-emerging here all that we are, all the allegedly universal emblems of the human in a kind of ideal hallucination and return of the repressed, including the worst, corniest, most banal things in Western 'culture' - things which will henceforth know no boundaries. It is, then, a moment of truth for that culture, as was the earlier confrontation " For the background to the 'memory of water' affair, see Philippe Alfonsi, Au nom de la science. 3 1 THE THAWING OF THE EAST with the primitive cultures of the whole world, from which our culture cannot really be said to have emerged with flying colours. The irony of the situation is such that it will perhaps be we who are one day forced to rescue the historical memory of Stalinism, while the countries of Eastern Europe will no longer remember the phenomenon. It will be up to us to keep on ice the memory of this tyrant who, for his part, kept the movement of history frozen, since that glacial age also forms part of our universal heritage. These events are remarkable from another point of view too. They force us to enquire into the turn history is now taking; not proceeding towards its end (a notion that was part of the fantasy of a linear history), but moving into reverse and into systematic obliteration. We are in the process of wiping out the entire twentieth century, effacing all the signs of the Cold War one by one, perhaps even all trace of the Second World War and of all the political or ideological revolutions of the twentfeth century. The reunification of Germany is inevitable, as are many other things, not in the sense that they represent a leap forward in history, but as a topsy-turvy rewriting of the whole of the twentieth century, a rewriting which is going to take up a large part of the last ten years of the century. At the rate we are going we shall soon be back at the Holy Roman Empire. And perhaps this is the illumination this fin de siecle offers and the true meaning of that controversial formula 'the- end of history'. The fact is that, in a sort of enthusiastic work of mourning, we are in the process of retracting all the significant events of this century, of whitewashing it, as if everything that had taken place (revolutions, the division of the world, exterminations, the violent transnationality of states, nuclear cliffhanging) - in short, history in its modern phase - were merely a hopeless imbroglio, and everyone had set about undoing that history with the same enthusiasm that had gone into making it. Restoratiop, regression, rehabilitation, revival of the old frontiers, of the old differences, of particularities, of religions - and even resipiscence in the sphere of.morals. It seems that all the signs of liberation achieved over a century are fading and will in the end perhaps be snuffed out one by one: we are engaged in a gigantic process of 32 THE TIIAWING OF THE EAST revisionism - not an ideological revisionism but a revisionism of history itself, and we seem in a hurry to finish it before the end of the century, secretly hoping perhaps to be able to start again from scratch in the new millennium. If only we could restore everything to its initial state. But which initial state? Before the twentieth century? Before the Revolution? How far can this reabsorption, this retraction take us? The fact is that it can move very, very quickly (as the events in Eastern Europe show), precisely because it is not a work of construction but a massive deconstruction of history, and one assuming almost a viral, epidemic form. 33 The strategy of dissolution All forms of repentance are tiresome, as are all commemorations, since they merely serve as illustrations of repentance. In this sense, even the events in Eastern Europe, even the fantastic aggiorttamento of the satellite states and the USSR, though that has nothing of the commemoration about it, are also illustrations of this repentance of history, this movement of istoria repentita. Neither a regression, nor an end, but a repentance. The figure of the pentito appeared in Italy at the turn of the 1980s. It emerged from within the ultra-left, at the farthest outpost of political modernity, and, in a way, marks that movement's post-modern turn. The pentiti suddenly went back on all their previous beliefs and thus came to serve liberal society as a vaccine against all radical temptations. A conversion of this kind was previously unthinkable (the Moscow trials are still about self-criticism, which is a modern value, whereas repentance is post-modern). But this is merely a first phase of a general reversion which does not stop at the extremes: repentance passed first from ultra-leftism to communism, then to the whole of the revolutionary movement. It affected the avant-gardes first, the cutting edge of modernity, then washed back into the central mass, into collective .ideologies. The whole of history is repenting .the 'excesses' of modernity (and Stalinism was certainly one of those excesses). But, above and beyond the excesses, the whole 34 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlJTION movement of modernity is affected. It is not just the revolution that is approaching the moment of repentance, but the evolution ary movement of modernity itself. Repent nce is part of post-modernity - the recycling of past forms, the exalting of residues, rehabilitation by bricolage, eclectic sentimentality. With a tendency towards high dilution and low intensities. In this sense, Stalinism was modernity and recent events of 'liberation' would represent, rather, a post modern drop in voltage. And, indeed, the astonishing ease with which they have occurred, their rapidity, is an obvious sign that we are tumbling down the slope of history. Instead of seeing these events as representing more modernity, history or liberty, one might ask if this is not an entropic process. Does this recouping of the democratic deficit, this alignment with a model of easy-going, laid-back freedom, this dislocation of a bloc of otherness represent an increase in energy and complexity or the dissipation of potential energy, energy leaking away as heat? Admittedly, the world gets warmer this way, but does it not thereby reach a more advanced stage of superficial energy - that of communication, of mere heat exchange - the lowest form of energy? The rule today is that everything must go into global circulation. Every event which has its place in the round of liberation is merely the extension of a physical model of circulation and communication, of a dominant model of consensus and regulation of exchanges, and in this sense profoundly wearisome (the form it takes may, however, be original and have extraordinary consequences - May '68, for example, was a politically lightweight episode, but the event was an inspired one). Moreover, what are the countries of Eastern Europe to be opened up to now that they have been liberated? To the liberal configuration of human rights and a market economy. But the liberal economy which is triumphant today is by no means the initial, historic, modern version of the market economy. We are in an expurgated version, purged of all its contra<iictions, of the conflictual infrastructure which was that of historic (one might say heroic) capitalism. It is a market economy with no social force 35 TIIE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION to battle against it, no competitive force to drive it on, no collective project to propel it into the future. In short, an economy which is no longer political but transpolitical, and perhaps even transeconomic in its incoherence - an economy of speculation and virtual collapse. Production, the market, ideol ogy, profit and utopia (profit itself is a utopia) were all modern. The competitive capitalist economy was modern. Ours, unreal and speculative, lacking even the notion of production, profit and progress, is no longer modern, but post-modern. And if the countries of Eastern Europe gain access to that economy, they will be entering not the modern but the post-modern era. The same goes for the 'liberal economy' of human rights. Entire peoples are rushing towards a 'historical' objective of liberty which no longer exists at all in the form in which they imagine it, towards a form of 'democratic' representation which has also long been dying from speculation (the statistical speculation of opinion polls, the media speculation of news [l'information]). The democratic illusion is universal, linked as it is to the zero degree of civic energy. All we have left of liberty is an ad-man's illusion, that it, the zero degree of the Idea, and it is this which sets the tone for our liberal regime of human rights. We all dream, no doubt, in some collective unconscious, of the resurrection of history, but we should not take our dreams for realities. This confused state of thawing relations, of rehabili tation, of liberal redemption and support for human rights is part of a reheating of history, not a revolutionary ferment. Ecstasy and beatification should not be confused. We are currently right in the middle of a phase of beatification, of religious consensus on established (or already lost) values. Which explains, by the way, the astonishing pre-eminence in the media of the figure of the Pope, who travels the whole world (even the Islamic Sahel !) blessing all forms of crossbreeding and repentance, while ensuring that durable forms of voluntary servitude are in place. Formar religion is extending its grasp, just as the speculative economy is extending its own through the Stock Exchange and capital movements. In the new forms of religion, as in the new forms of speculation, we are witnessing the striking illustration of 36 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION what Hegel calls 'the life,. moving within itself, of that which is dead'. * Something else provides a hint that what is happening in Eastern Europe is not a real historical leap forward - the strange ease with which all the communist regimes collapsed. They were not defeated: they had only to be touched for them to realize that they no longer existed. It was like a cartoon, where the tightrope walker, teetering over the abyss, suddenly sees his rope is gone and immediately falls, passing without transition from the jmaginary to the real (this is the basic mechanism of cartoons). The magical collapse of meaning in the verbal joke is of the same order. In the Witz, it is as though the linear structure of language had never existed and suddenly collapses of its own accord with incomprehensible obviousness. What is involved here is not a 'liberation' of language, nor its dislocation as an effect of unconscious contents, but an extreme, accidental form in which language seems to wish to go beyond its intentional operation and get caught up in its own dizzy whirl. Freud saw very well those strange attractors that are condensation, displacement, ellipsis and reversibility. Forms, not values. And recent events have to be seen in terms of a theory of forms, rather than any kind of theory based on relations of force. The communist systems did not succumb to an external enemy, nor even to an internal one (had that been the case, they would have resisted), but to their own inertia, taking advantage of the opportunity, as it were, to disappear (perhaps they were weary of existing). Entire systems lost their immunity and collapsed into themselves, like those buildings subtly dynamited in advance. They sank into their ow11 void. Now, this form of progression, of chain reaction, of superconductivity of events is a marvellous one, like the form of the joke, like all that eludes the rational laws of communication. What took place in Eastern Europe did not come about through ideology and historical violence. It was an almost viral event, and thus mysterious in its form - rather like everything that comes to • 'Das sich in sich selbst bewegepde Leben des Totes'. 37 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION us today through the channel of models and images. This is now the only impressive form and can itself act as a strange attractor - on the West in particular. The spectacle of those regimes imploding with such ease ought to make Western governments - or what is left of them - tremble, for they have barely any more existence than the Eastern ones. In 1968, we sa_w government authority collapse almost without violence, as if convinced of its non-existence by the mere mirror of the crowds and the street. And the images which came to us from Prague and Berlin were '68-style images, with the same atmosphere, the same faces. The non-existence of governmental power is, admittedly, less visible in the West, on account of its great dilution and the transparency which enables it to survive. In the East, it was opaque and highly concentrated, to the point that, as with an unstable crystal, only an extra little dose was needed for it to liquefy. It is possible, then, that the countries of Eastern Europe will pass on to us this model of viral collapse, of a virulence deconstructive of power. In exchange, we might pass on to them our liberal virus, our compulsion for objects and images, media and communication, a virus, in our case, which devastates civil society. One virus for another. At bottom, this could be seen as the last episode in the Cold War, a kind of reciprocal contamination between the two blocs formerly shielded from one another by the existence of the Wall. Behind the apparent victory of the West, it is clear, on the contrary, that the strategic initiative came from the East, not by aggression this time, but by disintegration, by a kind of offensive self-liquidation, catching the whole of the West unawares. In the eternal state of deterrence between the two blocs, a situation from which there was no apparent issue, the advantage could be gained only by the side which, one way or another, ended up disarmed. By force of circumstance, which may have equated with a perception of his own weakness, Gorbachev was able to take this strategic tack of disarmament, the real deconstruction of his own bloc, and thereby of the entire world order. This was, in a way, dying communism's witty parting shot, since the quasi-voluntary destabilization of the Eastern bloc, with the complicity of its peoples, is also a destabilization of the West. 38 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION Let us beware of the na'ive vision of a frozen history suddenly awakening and automatically heading once again, like a turtle, for the sea (for democracy). Things are much more complicated than that. Now that the problem of the Wall is out of the way, we can see that it perhaps provided more protection for the West than for Eastern Europe. Now that the triumphal illusion of the West annexing the East - for the greater glory of democracy, of course - has faded, we can sense that it might be the other w y about: the East gobbling up the West by blackmailing it with poverty and human rights. The East's great weapon is no longer the H-bomb, but Chernobyl. It is the accident, the accidental virus, the virus of its own decomposition - Chernobyl whose radioactive cloud, by crossing frontiers with far greater ease than armoured divisions, prefigured the collapse of the Wall and the progressive con tamination of the Western world. Bush may well disarm in the pretence of having won the Cold War, but it is the USSR and Gorbachev who invented the real bombe a depression, the surest one, the one which turns its own depression into a bomb. * The Eastern bloc cheerfully destroying its own ideological and bureaucratic foundations is more than a twist or ruse of history; it is a joke, a witty stroke of ironic inversion which forces us to read history the other way around. Perhaps such an involuntary challenge could only come from within the confines of an empire which had shown no glimmer of irony, except the crepuscular variety, for half a century. German would describe this kind of transcendent high spirits, of historical rejoicing in sudden change, as Ubermut. True freedom is certainly not tha  of human rights, but the freedom which springs from this ironic turn taken by history (current events are never outdone for irony, even in the West: to see Noriega flouting Bush and taking refuge in the Vatican chancellery is not without its comic side). However this may be, what is going to come of this transfusion * 'Une bombe a <lepression' is a fuel-air explosive device, such as the CBU 55- Bs which were used by the Americans to 'clear' jungle areas in Vietnam. 39 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION of Good and Evil, beyond the dusting off of liberties and the realignment of democratic fa ades, remains a mystery. For Evil is not simply the repressed. If it were only that, it would be sufficient merely to lift the repression weighing upon it, to 'liberate' it, as is being done everywhere (in particular in the East where the barrier of Evil has been broken down). But we are soon going to see that Evil is something different, that it easily outlasts all liberation and that, in dismantling the visible Evil empire, the deeper form of maleficence is simultaneously being liberated. Evil takes advantage of transparency (glasnost) and becomes the transparence of things themselves. Evil was visible, opaque, localized in the territories of the East. We have exorcized it, liberated it, liquidated it. But has it, for all that, ceased to be Evil? Not at all: it has become fluid, liquid, interstitial, viral. That is the transparence pf Evil. It is not that it is transparent [est transparent] in the sense that you might see through it. It is, rather, that it shows though [transparait] in all things when they lose their image, their mirror, their reflection, their shadow, when they no longer offer any substance, distance or resistance, when they become both immanent and elusive from an excess of fluidity and luminosity. So long as Evil was opaque, obscene, oblique, obscure, there was still a transcendence of Evil and it could be held at a distance. It has now become immanent and interstitial (in the West, it is assuming, in particular, the form of terrorism as a filterable virus. Political terrorism, but" also all the other forms of virulence - biological, sexual, media-based or electronic). With the events in Eastern Europe, this theme is given striking illustration, and Evil is entering upon a phase of definitive dissemination. Shattered, destabilized communism will pass into the veins of the West in metabolic, surreptitious form, and destabilize it in its turn. This will no longer be the violence of the Idea, but the virus of de-immunization. A communism which dissolves itself is a successful communism. One of the consequences of this East-West transfusion is the elimination of the renegades who functioned as an umbilical cord between the two blocs, condemned on the one side, feted on the 40 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION other, but complicit with both. By way of dissidents - the political avant-garde of the Eastern bloc countries and refuge of the Western intellectual avant-garde - East and West carried on a kind of dialogue of the deaf throughout ;ill the years of the arms race. Some among the dissidents have analysed the ambiguity of this situation. Including Sakharov himself. But Sakharov is dead. He died, significantly, when dissidence, victorious, no longer had any meaning. Dissidents cannot bear a thaw. They have to die, or else become president (Walesa, Havel) in a sort of bitter revenge which, at any event, marks their death as dissidents. They lived in the silent cineflla of the political; the 'talkie' era kills them off. They whose strength was in silence (or censorship) are con demned to speak and be devoured by speech. When the Eastern bloc societies catch up with their dissidents and absorb them, it is the end of modernity, as it is when Western society catches up with and absorbs its avant-gardes. In the East and the West, the Idea is finished. The organic consensus marks the dawning of post-modern societies, non-conflictual and at one with them selves. The collapse of the Wall is the visible outward manifes tation of an invisible event which has affected all these societies for at least twenty years: the collapse of the division or split internal to each of them, of the conflictual structure which came about with the upheavals and revolutions of the modern era. The Western intellectuals who embodied that split, that internal division of societies and minds, are themselves fated to disappear like the silent movie actors. As for those who were pro-dissident in the West, the fine spirited sympathizers, what is to become of their solidarity? They too are condemned. They spoke for othe,rs. Will they now have the courage to shut up? They will not, and are already running off to the scene of the crime, to the Berlin Wall, for that was indeed the site of the crime and the sacrifice. The point when the Wall comes down marks the end of their careers. There is no longer any abominable Other (the communists), no longer any adorable Other (the dissidents). · What of Zinoviev? What of his cynical, merrily nihilistic and paradoxical line (Cioran: history is dying for want of paradoxes) ? 41 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION The paradox of communism, in Zinoviev's view, is that of being at one and the same time an outdated solution, an end of history, the Evil empire and the definitive solution because it has experienced the worst, as the West has not done, and has drawn the consequences from it. It is therefore a solution from after the catastrophe (whatever it may be, whether Third World War or something else), a final solution to the survival of the species and thus an inevitable and definitive model, while nonetheless one that is outdated at the level of the economy and history. This paradox is going to become highly charged when put to the test by the reunification of the two worlds. For the .human and ideological failure of communism by no means compromises its potency and virulence as an anthropological model. It is a kind of gigantic snare of the social and the political spheres, which might be said to have succeeded, even if it destroys itself - particularly if it destroys itself - in a kind of strategie du pire which would be imposed on everyone as the last immune defence, man being taken in hand, on a universal scale, to protect him from himself. On the opposite side, there is only the transparency of democ racy, incapable of containing the radiation of Evil. There is, moreover, a paradox of Western societies opposite and equivalent to that of communism: though they present all the signs of more developed and open societies, at the same time they have one eye on the past as though it were a void they have created behind them, while absorbing the future. It is like the story of the lorry and the hole: some workers dig a hole and load it on to a lorry, but when they hit a bump in the road the hole falls off and, reversing, the lorry falls into the hole. We are the lorry and the hole: we are weighed down by a hole in our memories, weighed down by the retrospective emptiness of our history, to the point that our societies do not even know whether they are heading towards the future. They are riding the surf of their present, problematic wealth. Beneath their apparent mobility and acceleration, they have come to a stop in their hearts and their aims. That is, indeed, why they are accelerating, but they are doing so out of inertia. The encounter between this type of society with maximum 42 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION mobility but immobility in its heart and the Eastern bloc societies which are petrified on the outside but in no way inert in their inward core should be highly dramatic or totally ambiguous. Like blood transfusions today, the transfusion of Good and Evil presents many dangers. There is a risk we shall pass all our germs on to them, and they might give us all of theirs (this is how contacts· between dissimilar cultures or races go). First of all, there will be seventy years of 'backwardness' to make up, but are we so sure things are going to happen that way? Instead of the Eastern bloc countries accelerating towards modern democracy, perhaps we are going to drift in the other direction, moving back beyond democracy and falling into the hole of the past. It would be the opposite of Orwell's prediction (strangely, he has not been mentioned of late, though the collapse of Big Brother ought to have been celebrated for the record, if only for the irony of the date Orwell set for the onset of totalitarianism which turned out to be roughly that of its collapse) . Even more ironic is the fact that we are not at all threatened by the totalitarian (Stalinist) rewriting of the past, but the democratic rewriting of history: the very images of Stalin and Lenin swept away, streets and cities renamed, statues scattered, soon none of all that will have existed. Yet another ruse of history - not the last but, as ever, the best. Democratic rewriting. The scenario is off to a good start. Everyone is having a clear-out. All the dictatorships are being wound up and sold off cheap, before the end of the century if possible (before Christmas for Eastern Europe so that everything can shine bright in a new Nativity). Splendid emulation, as stupendous as the tolerance which has reigned over it all so far. Everyone equally committed to the liquidation! Eliminating the planet's blackspots as one might eliminate traffic accident blackspots, as we might eliminate spots from a face: cosmetic surgery elevated to the level of the political, and to Olympic performance levels. Of course, this great democratic rally is not believable for an instant. Not that there is any Machiavellian strategy going on, but it's too good to be true. There is something suspect about the 43 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION sudden consensus. The disappearance, as if by magic, of all contradiction is more than suspect (China has temporarily relapsed, and what remains of world communism is merely a theme park. With a little imagination, Cuba could be joined up with Disneyworld, which is not far away, as part of a world heritage centre). Something tells us that what we have here is not a historical evolution, but an epidemic of consensus, an epidemic of democratic values - in other words, this is a viral effect, a triumphant effect of fashion. If democratic values spread so easily, by a capillary or communicating-vessels effect, then they must have liquefied, they must now be worthless. Throughout the modern age they were held dear and dearly bought. Today, they are being sold off at a discount and we are watching a Dutch auction of democratic values which looks very much like uncontrolled speculation. Which makes it highly probable that, as might be the case with financial speculation, these same values may crash. It is clear that the ultimate deterrence has come from the East - no longer that of the balance of terror, which, for forty years, prevented the event of atomic war from coming about, but of the imbalance of terror, which prevents the confrontation itself from coming about. Deterrence by self-dissolution, demolition, de escalation, unilateral disarmament, auto-destabilization which completely destabilizes the opponent - a strategy of weakness, an unexpected, unpredictable strategy eveh for the protagonists themselves, but all the more effective for that. A strategy of dis appearance, dispersion, dissemination, contamination, virulence by fragmentation. For not only are the weapons, hardware and brains of the former USSR going to turn up all over the world, but the model of disintegration is going to radiate out also, more effective than a thousand atom bombs. Integral, totalitarian communism could be sealed up and neutralized. Disintegrated communism becomes viral; it becomes capable of passing through its own wall and infecting the whole world, not by ideology or by its model of functioning, but by its model of dysfunctioning and 44 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION of sudden, violent destructuring. Certainly, we might ask whether this is still communism? Whatever the answer, it is exerting an influence over the world which it could never muster by arms or by thought, an influence over the whole world by the event of its disappearance. In that sense, it might be said that it is triumphant, since perfect communism, the fully realized communism, like the fully realized utopia, is the one which has disappeared. In that sense, too, the consequences of communism's sudden self dissolution are perhaps even more incalculable than those of its appearance at the dawn of this century. Not through ideology, but through the auto-da-fe of its own principles, the uncon ditional acting out of capitulation. In terms of ideas, it had opened up a monolithic, totalitarian path; with its inverted acting out, it opens up the path of dislocation for all structures and empires. The East will have victoriously countered capital with capitulation. It is Chernobyl that will turn out to have been the real starting point in this involuntary, but brilliant strategic inversion which has destabilized the very concept of relations of force, creating out of this a strategy of relations of weakness and completely changing the rules of the game. Up to that point, things were frozen: no military, offensive acting-out was possible. Everything culminated in Star Wars, an impossible scenario: orbital bombs are virtual; they do not explode. The only true bomb explodes - or implodes - on the spot, by superfusion: Chernobyl, an accidental acting-out. It was the Eastern bloc that exploded that bomb in its own heart and it was that bomb which, in the form of the first atomic cloud, crossed the Wall and frontiers without encountering any opposition, inaugurating the fusion between the two worlds by radioactive infiltration. So the initial explosion of the New World Order will indeed have come from the East, and the contamination has passed from East to West. After Chernobyl, the Berlin Wall no longer exists. Symbolically, it is therefore nuclear fusion, after all, which presides over the political, transpolitical confusion of the blocs. By the suicidal accident of Chernobyl, the former USSR both admits its impotence, its weakness, and at the same time passes the whole lot over to the 45 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION West, obliging it to manage the collapse, to manage a whole world gone bankrupt. That of communism to begin with, but soon, subtly, the world of capital itself. Up to now, communism had sought out the weakest link in the capitalist chain. Suddenly, it discovered that it was the weakest link and, by destroying itself, by cracking up almost accidentally, it sent the other world hurtling to its doom, forced it to deny itself as enemy, contaminated its defences, exported its own economic and political suicide. The captive hell of communism found itself liberated. From this point on, the barrier separating hell from heaven is liquidated. And in this case, of course, the liquefaction is general, and hell always submerges heaven. Solzhenitsyn writes (against Sakharov and his idea of having the two hostile blocs converge so as to unite their mutual qualities): 'What can come of two societies afflicted with such redhibitory vices when they come closer together and are transformed by the contact between them? A society twice as immoral.' The dream of plurality is indeed precisely this: differences are to be exchanged as positive qualities. Whereas what always wins out in the exchange of differences, in dialogue, is the exchange and addition of negative qualities. Fusion always turns into confusion, contact into contamination. We have an example of this today with AIDS and the fatal potentiality threatening every sexual encounter. But the same goes for computers: maximum interconnectedness brings maximum vulnerability of all networks (the trend now is towards stand alone computers; it seems in fact that networks transmit viruses even faster than information). Genetic confusion runs in this same direction. It is one of the aspects of the principle of Evil that it always proceeds more quickly than Good. So Solzhenitsyn, for his part objecting to this immoral confusion, is right and Sakharov wrong. But we have nothing against vice and immorality. If they have to be increased in the confusion of the two worlds, then perhaps that is better, all in all, than the austere, puritanical order of deterrence and the balance of terror. Why not a world society which is entirely corrupt, a single empire which is the empire of confusion, a New World 46 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION Disorder which combines the filterable viruses of communism with the discreet charm of the rights of man and nature? It might seem that the flow of wealth and abundance moving from West to East wins out over the opposite flow. But what flows from West to East is chiefly the illusion of victory. What is moving in the other direction is more subtle and more deadly: the virus of weakness, the multiple forms of disaffection, the end of all democratic illusions. In short, nothing is decided and no one can say who will win, who will be first to destabilize the other, the rich, business-like countries or those trained by Marxism in abulia and corruption? Slackness or efficiency? Fatal apathy or high performance levels? The captive hell of paradise or the captive paradise of hell? The two worlds now stand opposed not with weapons or ideas, but mentally in the artificial promiscuity of the New World Order. This is where the transparence of Evil begins. This is where we shall see, once all the conditions for order are fulfilled, how irresistible is disorder; once all the conditions for Good are fulfilled, how irresistible is Evil, how it circulates in the same arterial system as Good and feeds off it, in all innocence, in all perversity. It is Dracula against Snow White (the Dracula myth is gathering strength all around as the Faustian and Promethean myths fade) . We have a good idea who is going to suck the other's blood once their glass coffins are broken open. It is in Germany that these two worlds are telescoped together, with Berlin as the epicentre, since there, paradoxically, it is from reunification that the antagonism arises. It is not the confron tation but the rapprochement of two worlds which produces violence and the clash of mentalities. The historical failure of the one, when faced with the dazzling success of the other, may turn to defiance, and those very people who eyed the wealth enviously when it was still forbidden may very well turn their backs entirely on the Western model merely to remain consistent with them selves. In the course of their misfortunes, the people of Eastern Europe have certainly acquired an opinion on history and its perverse effects. Against all theoretical predictions, out of the two 47 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION opposed worlds of Capital and Labour, it is that of Labour they have seen collapse. Logically, they must have drawn from this a lesson of non-labour and collective irresponsibility. However this may be, it will certainly not be easy to convert them to the liberal cult of performance. This is how the reversal of Western values begins. Not merely by the infiltration into the metropolitan heartland of a Fourth World which, unlike the Third, has no other territory than the one it destabilizes from within, but also by the osmosis of an Eastern European world which is decomposing, and making of that decomposition if not a strategy then at least a trap, a decoy, a politique du pire. Now, we know that one of the characteristics of the West, represented to perfection by the Americans in the recent Gulf War, is a tendency to shoot at decoys. The drip-feeding of Western values behind the Iron Curtain gives way today to the percolation, the surreptitious infiltration of the impotence, slackness, technological, economic and demo graphic ill-will of another world that was long considered residual, backward, under-developed and which is rising up today as a fμlly fledged protagonist, an equal protagonist and perhaps even a superior one to the extent that its potential of impotence is superior to our potential of potency. Now, contrary to the apparent facts which suggest that all cultures are penetrable by the West - that is, corruptible by the universal - it is the West which is eminently penetrable. The other cultures (including those of Eastern Europe), even when they give the impression of selling themselves, of prostituting themselves to material goods or Western ideologies, in fact remain impenetrable behind the mask of prostitution. They can be wiped out physically and morally, but not penetrated. This alienness is linked to their complicity with themselves. The West, for its part, is alien to itself, and anyone can just walk right in. The logic of this challenge is alien to that of the economic and liberal New World Order. In the order of power and wealth, ,one desires the death of the other so as to take his place. By contrast, what these refractory, incompatible cultures want, what they demand, is not to take the place but to see the death of the West, 48 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION even at the risk of dying themselves. The West, naive as ever, believes it is resented for its power and wealth and, even more naively, believes in the compatibility of all cultures. But even when the 'others' seem to be demanding their share of the cake, this is still an allegorical way of desiring its death. The West is discovering the Eastern bloc countries, weak and drained, as once it discovered the survivors of the concentration_ camps. The danger is to feed them too quickly, since this kills them. But, in any case, whether or not they are saved, they live in another space - shattered by catastrophe. They will never come back into ours. Certainly, we shall do all we can to wipe this past from their memories.· But in vain. It is they, by contrast, who will suck us into their empty space, just as the dead and the survivors of the camps have sucked our last vague desires for culture, law and morality into the empty space and impotent memory of extermination. The attraction of the void is irresistible. The 'victory' of the West is not unlike a depressurizing of the West in the void of communism, in the void of history. All that began with Chernobyl, as a cold, almost involuntary, strategy, is still going its merry way. Ten or twenty Soviet nuclear power stations sit there, awaiting fissure and meltdown, like a time-bomb that cannot be defused, prolonging the suspense of a phoney, cold war, which, being accidental, would offer no possibility of retaliation. On the contrary, indeed, the enemy is forced to take you in hand to avoid catastrophe. The whole strategy of the ex-Empire is organized in this way - at great cost in poverty, radiation or civil war - around the black hole into which it might itself be said to have fallen, but into which it is dragging all its old adversaries, one after another, along with history itself, causing this latter to ebb back to an uncertain past, a foetal stage where the phantoms of the old conflicts and the old nationalisms bump up against the ghost of the atomic weapons which are now rendered useless (and which it will hence be possible to spread around generously) . To this, we must add the dispersal b y auction of the Soviet army which, like the state, is being sold off for spares. We had 49 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION never seen anything like this before - the strongest state and largest army in the world fainting right away. We have not taken this great world premiere fully on board. Let us hope it is merely a dress rehearsal. What should have been a source of universal rejoicing passed off almost without interest - a sign of the nullity of the age. But we have to understand what this break-up of the Red Army and the selling-off of its nuclear forces will mean. It amounts to their dispersal over the whole of the globe. Once the reference point of its intended usage is gone, weaponry, like the atom, becomes viral and interstitial. The illusion is, in fact, to believe that the collapse of the great empires opens up a renewal of history, whereas it merely opens out on to the metastases of empire. The most probable hypothesis is that we are dealing here not with a disappearance, but with a dispersal of empire into all the local, provincial, territorial micro empires. This is the same homology between the detail and the whole as in holograms: the mirror of the empire is broken, but each fragment preserves its image. The great dismantled systems (and the process isn't over yet; just wait for the end of the American Empire and the 'historic' nations) find the means to perpetuate themselves in another way, not by dynastic filiation as in the past, but by something like fractal division, by scissiparity: micro-imperia, micro-dictatorships, micro-autarkies bearing within themselves, in miniature, all the stigmata and vices of empire. Reintroducing the same servitude, this time administered at the level of identity (whether the identity of the individual, the group, the ethnic group or the enterprise). The end of empires means the unrestricted reign of slave micro-systems. Even in the end of the nuclear empire we find this same trend: the dispersal of atomic weapons will have the effect of enslaving the other nations to the same system of deterrence, the same consensual equilibrium. And what of the political in all this? That died with the great empires. Their perpetuation in other forms - fragmented, irradi ated, decentred, peripheral - the second life of the great empires in retroviral form, so to speak, genetically infecting all their wastes, all their by-products, all their basic cells, is no longer of 50 TiiE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlITION the order of the political, but of the transpolitical. A flabby, decentred, high-dilution transpolitical, where ideological options are immaterial and historical violence minimal (in most conflicts, the violence is merely a homeopathic, police violence, internal to the systems). To all intents and purposes, the political died with the historical passions aroused by the great ideas and the great empires. The transpolitical, for its part, has but a single passion: that of the work of mourning and recycling (intellectuals are passing through the same phase: the work of mourning for morality and the universal conscience) . And a single, inexhaust ible energy - for managing residues. The new labour power, which has emerged in this fin de siecle, is mourning power. The energy of the corpse is recycled, just as Romain Gary recycled the spiritual charge of dead souls as material energy ('the charge of souls'), and as Jarry had dead men pedalling - henceforth indefatigable since they were pedalling by inertia. As something which has failed, this work of mourning is interminable; it becomes lost in the melancholy of homeopathic and homeostatic systems, where even the recognition of death, the intuition of that death (of the political), is impossible, since it would reintroduce a fatal virus into the virtual immortality of the transpolitical. There is the same problem with freedom: the least reinjection of a dose of freedom, or even of a problematic of freedom, would introduce a fatal virus into the chain of networks, the virus of voluntary servitude - a non-violent, consensual, ecological micro-servitude, which is everywhere the successor to totalitarian oppression. The most amusing feature of this history, the ironic thing about the end, is that communism should have collapsed exactly as Marx had foreseen for capitalism, with the same suddenness, and, ultimately, with such ease that it did not even strike the imagination. The fact that he got the victor wrong in no way detracts from the exactness of Marx's analysis; it merely adds the objective irony which was lacking. Fate took care of that. It is as though some evil genie had substituted the one for the other - communism for capitalism - at the last moment. As if, since 5 1 THE STRATEGY OF DISSOLlTTION Western society had, in its own way, brought to fruition the prophecies of a future society (the withering away of the State, of the political, of work, the administration of things and general ized leisure - even if all these are simulated) in communism's stead, the latter could simply disappear. An admirable division of labour: Capital has done communism's work and communism has died in Capital's place. But this can just as easily turn around. For all these ideal perspectives, including that of theoretical communism, were perhaps merely absurd. Capital, for its part, ended up achieving the objective of real communism, which was generalized exchange. At any price. Precisely at any price, indeed, since it achieved it under the auspices of the market and the commodity. But this too is part of the irony of history: the inversion of the final meaning - the final illusion. One cannot ask events to be true to the initial conditions. They sometimes occur in exactly the opposite way, in an ironic mode, while engendering the same final conditions. Capital has cannibalized all negativity, that of history and that of work in a - literally - sarcastic fashion: devouring the very substance of the human being to transform it into its essence as productive being. It has unceremoniously devoured the dialectic by parodistically taking the opposing terms upon itself, by parodistically going beyond its own contradictions. What we see before us is the parodic triumph of the classless society, the parodic realization of all utopian metaphors: the man of leisure, transdisciplinary pluralism, the mobility and availability of all signs - the cook become head of state, or almost (we have seen worse since this old dream of Lenin's). Unfortunately, in the meantime, the State has disappeared, or almost disappeared, doubtless as a result of the same effect which enables the cook to accede to its head, without it being possible to say whether the disappearance of the one brought about the promotion of the other, or the other way about. But, in any case, when the State ceases to be the State, the cook ceases to be the cook. As Brecht says, the fact that beer is not beer is harmoniously compensated by the fact that the cigar is not a cigar either. Thus the ironic order is safe and sound. 52 Tiffi STRATEGY OF DISSOLUTION The other irony of history is the Ubuesque form of repentance. Gorbachev is giving up Marxism! Fantastic! But what does 'giving up' mean? Can you give up Marxism in the way you give up tobacco or alcohol? Can you give up your father and mother? Can you give up God? In its time, the Church has come close to giving up the Devil or the Immaculate Conception, but this has not occurred. Renunciation is the symmetrical and opposite movement to faith - as absurd and useless. If things exist, there is no use believing in them. If they do not exist, there is no use renouncing them. So the renunciation of the class struggle is grotesque: you can deny the class struggle or sacrifice it if you have to, but you can't give it up like an old skin or a childhood superstition. This renunciation, this apostasy, is a very bad example. What if one day the West too were to renounce capitalism. And what if, one day, the West were forced to revive Marxism, which is, after all, part of our heritage, damn it (as also is damnation). * • 'Et si un jour l'Occident etait force de ressusciter le marxisme, qui fait quand meme partie du patrimoine, que <liable (le Diable aussi d'ailleurs).' I have departed slightly from the French text here in order to retain the pun. 53 The Timi oara massacre Yet it seems we are tired of fuelling the end of history with simulacra and are now letting it follow out its course; we are tired of that long simulation of modernity and are entering, with recent events - including those in Eastern Europe - upon a phase of desimulation. The Gulf War and the events in Eastern Europe are among those quasi-unreal events which have less meaning in themselves than in the fact that they put an end to things which long ago ceased to have meaning (communism in the Eastern bloc countries, the Cold War for the Gulf) . In this sense, they are, after all, symptomatic, but ambiguous events - immediately credible (via the media), but fundamentally undecidable. Retrospectively, it is the same with many past or recent events: they too are not of the order of truth, but of credibility. News [information] makes everything credible (that is, uncertain), even previous facts, even future events. The criteria of truth have been supplanted by the principle of credibility (which is also the principle of statistics and opinion polls), and this is the true guiding principle of news. The uncertainty I am speaking of is like a virus which affects or infects all history, current events and images. Even if it is refuted, it can only be refuted virtually, since virtuality forms part of reality itself - a reality which is now uncertain, paradoxical, random, hyper-real, filtered by the medium, cut adrift by its own image. Hence the interest of submitting the Gulf War and the 54 THE TIMISOARA MASSACRE Romanian 'revolution' to this uncertainty test, of adding them to that set of objects which are unverifiable other than on the screens, which immediately degrade into news and are rapidly laundered and forgotten like any other spectacle. In the case of the Romanian revolution, it was the faking of the dead in Timi§oara which aroused a kind of moral indignation and raised the problem of the scandal of 'disinformation' or, rather, of information itself as scandal. It was not the dead that were the scandal, but the corpses being pressed into appearing before the television cameras, as in the past dead souls were pressed into appearance in the register of deaths. It was their being taken hostage, as it were, and our being held hostage too, as mystified TV viewers. Being blackmailed by violence and death, especially in a noble and revolutionary cause, was felt to be worse than the violence itself, was felt to be a parody of history. All the media live off the presumption of catastrophe and of the succulent imminence of death. A photo in Liberation, for example, shows us a convoy of refugees 'which, some time after this shot was taken, was to be attacked by the Iraqi army'. Anticipation of effects, morbid simulation, emotional blackmail. It was the same on CNN with the arrival of the Scuds. Nothing is news if it does not pass through that horizon of the virtual, that hysteria of the virtual - not in the psychological sense, but in the sense of a compulsion for what is presented, in all bad faith, as real to be consumed as unreal. In the past, to show something up as a fake, we said: 'It's just play-acting', 'It's all romance !', 'It's put on for the cameras !'. This time, with Romania and the Gulf War, we were able to say, 'It's just TV!' Photographic or cinema images still pass through the negative stage (and that of projection), whereas the TV image, the video image, digital and synthetic, are images without a negative, and hence without negativity and without reference. They are virtual and the virtual is what puts an end to all negativity, and thus to all reference to the real or to events. At a stroke, the contagion of SS THE TIMI OARA MASSACRE images, engendering themselves without reference to a real or an imaginary, itself becomes virtually without limits, and this limitless engendering produces information as catastrophe. Is an image which refers only to itself still an image? However this may be, that image raises the problem of its indifference to the world, and thus of our indifference to it - which is a political problem. When television becomes the strategic space of the event, it sets itself up as a deadly self-reference, it becomes a bachelor machine. * The real object is wiped out by news - not merely alienated, but abolished. All that remains of it are traces on a monitoring screen. Many Romanian eyewitness accounts speak of being dispossessed of the event in this way, deprived of the lived experience they have of it by being submerged in the media network, by being placed under house arrest in front of their television screens. Spectators then become exoterics of the screen, living their revolution as an exoticism of images, themselves exogenous, touristic spectators of a virtual history. From the moment the studio becomes the strategic centre, and the screen the only site of appearance, everyone wants to be on it at all costs, or else gathers in the street in the glare of the cameras, and these, indeed, actually film one another. The street becomes an extension of the strtdio, that is, of the non-site of the event, of the virtual site of the event. The street itself becomes a virtual space. Site of the definitive confusion of masses and medium, of the real-time confusion of act and sign. There is no will to communicate in all this. The only irresistible drive is to occupy this non-site, this empty space of representation which is the screen. Representation (political representation too) is currently a trough of depression - meteorological depression - which the media fill up with their turbulences, with the same consequences as occur when any kind of space is suddenly depressurized. The highest pressure of news corresponds to the lowest pressure of events and reality [le reel] . • A reference to Michel Carrouges's Les machines celibataires and the works by Duchamp et al. which inspired it. 56 TI-IE TIMI OARA MASSACRE The same unrealism in the Ceau§escu trial. It is not the judicial procedure itself which is scandalous but the video tape, unaccept able as the only, bloodless trace of a bloody event. In the eyes of the whole world, this will remain an event forever suspect, for the sole reason of its - strangely obscene - scenic abduction. This hidden jury, its voice striking out against the accused, these defendants we are forced to see even though they are virtually dead, these dead prisoners shot a second time to meet the needs of news. One might even wonder whether the actors in this staged event were not deliberately trying to make themselves seem suspect in the eyes of world opinion, as though playing at sabotaging their image. At the same time, the Ceau§escu trial was pulled off perfectly as a video production, betraying a sharp sense of the image-function, the blackmail-function, the deterrence function. Deep down, the intuitive grasp of these things has grown more sophisticated over there, in the shadow of dictator ship, than it has with us. We have nothing to teach them. For, if the Romanians themselves got high on this media speculation which served them as a revolutionary aphrodisiac, they also dragged all the Western media into the same news demagogy. By manipulating themselves, they caused us spontaneously to swallow their fiction. We bear the same responsibility as they do. Or, rather, there is no responsibility anywhere. The question of responsibility cannot even be raised. It is the evil genius of news which promotes such staging. When information gets mixed in with its source, then, as with sound waves, you get a feedback effect - an effect of interference and uncertainty. When demand is maximal (and everywhere today the demand for events is maximal), it short-circuits the initial situation and produces an uncontrollable response effect. That is, ultimately, why we do the Romanians an injustice when we accuse them of manipulation and bad faith. No one is responsible. It is all an effect of the infernal cycle of credibility. The actors and the media sensed obscurely that the events in Eastern Europe had to be given credibility, that that revolution had to be lent credibility by an extra dose of dead bodies. And the media themselves had to be lent credibility by the reference to the 57 THE TIMI OARA MASSACRE people. Leading to a vicious circle of credibility, the result of which is the decredibilizing of the revolution and the events themselves. The logical sequence of news and history turns back against itself, bringing, in its cyclical movement, a kind of deflation of historical consciousness. The Americans did just the same in the Gulf War. By the excessive nature of their deployment and stagecraft, by putting their power and news control so extravagantly to the test, they decredibilized both war and news. They were the Ubus of their own power, just as the Romanians were the Ubus of their own impotence. Excess itself engenders the parody which invalidates the facts. And, just as the principle of economics is wrecked by financial speculation, so the principle of politics [le politique] and history is wrecked by media speculation. Contrary to the fiction of universal solidarity surrounding the media and images, events have less and less meaning, less and less reality beyond a near horizon. In the media space, the rate of diffusion is maximal, but the resonance factor is zero. In the past, facts and actions had a real resonance within a limited field, a field of organic proximity. The Europe of the fifteenth or eighteenth centuries communicated in a much livelier, freer way than the interactive, TV Europe of the twentieth century. And that 'natural' horizon opened out on to a possible universe, whereas today the universal promiscuity of images reinforces our exile and immures us in our indifference. We are convinced that the Eastern European powers collapsed because they had infringed the 'natural and democratic' law of news and information. Everything over there was underexposed to the light of human rights and hence unreal and unnatural. For fifty years, we had regarded all these peoples as mystified victims of dictatorship, whose only way out was to be woμ over to our marvellous values. As if we were not ourselves hostages to a system every bit as terroristic as theirs, the system of fluidity and transparency, a system just as effective at putting an end to history as the Eastern regimes with their bureaucratic deep-freeze. Today, now that transparency (glasnost!) has been achieved, a 58 THE TIMISOARA MASSACRE transparency which turns out of course to be rigged and loaded down with all the detritus of history, one might almost feel sorry that entire peoples are coming out of their darkness, even if it was violent and tyrannical, to fall prey to the Enlightenment, to go down like flies in the artificial light of our freedom, our unbounded solidarity, our unscrupulous news system. We who so respect the private life of individuals should also respect that of peoples and their right - against all international morality - to escape this modern tribunal of news and information-gathering which is assuming all the features of an inquisition. For only information has sovereign rights, since it controls the right to existence. It is this whole democratic pharisaism of the West that is thwarted by the Romanians' media cynicism, by their radical use of the medium and radical contempt for the message (of course, they are only used here as an example). Ultimately, whether or not they intended to, they have taught us a useful lesson. By parodying it, they have booby-trapped our .finest technological gimmick: the image. By handling it unscrupulously, they have destroyed its mythology. And they have also given us a useful lesson in freedom, not by truly achieving liberty, but by ensnaring us in a fantasy of liberation which is, in fact, geared to our Western demand. By their revolutionary mise en scene, they sent us the message we were expecting, here employing the mirror trick of conformism which blinds its victims. And we were blinded. At the satne time, they showed us that freedom extended as far as the open, cynical manipulation of the facts, whereas we, for our part, only go so far as their shamefaced manipulation. We confine ourselves to the moral, conditional forms of liberty whereas they go as far as the unconditional, parodic, paroxystic form of liberation of the image, of liberation by the image. It is not clear why, once it had been 'liberated', the image would not be entitled to lie. No doubt this may even be seen as one of its vital functions, and it is naive to think it was going to liberate itself to bring about truth - just as naive as thinking that the Romanians were going to liberate themselves to arrive at a 'true' 59 TIIE TIMISOARA MASSACRE democracy. The truth is that the liberation of the image inclines it quite naturally to simulation, and that is where it finds its true freedom. Though we may not wish to acknowledge this, we have nonetheless to accept the evidence: the image and, with it, news [l'information] is not attached to any principle of truth or reality. Here, then, is the international consciousness foiled by its own ideal, hoist with its own petard. The Gulf War merely accentu ated the disastrous impression of our having been drawn so far into simulation that the question of truth and reality cannot even be posed, of our having been drawn so far into the 'liberation' of the medium and the image that the question of freedom cannot even be posed. But can news and the media really be put on trial now? Absolutely not, for the simple reason that the media themselves hold the key to the judicial enquiry. There can be no contesting their innocence since 'disinformation' is always imputed to an accident of news-gathering [information] ; the guiding principle itself is never questioned. And yet there will, nonetheless, have beett a kind of verdict in this Romanian affair, and the artificial heaps of corpses will have been of some use, all the same. One might ask whether the Romanians, by the very excessiveness of this staged event and the simulacrum of their revolution, have not served as demystifiers 0f news and its guiding principle. For, if the media image has put an end to the credibility of the event, the event will, in its turn, have put an end to the credibility of the image. Never again shall we be able to look at a television picture in good faith, and this is the finest collective demystification we have ever known. The finest revenge over this new arrogant power, this power to blackmail by events. Who can say what responsibility attaches to the televisual production of a false massacre (Timi§oara), as compared with the perpetrating of a true massacre? This is another kind of crime against humanity, a hijacking of fantasies, affects and the credulity of hundreds of millions of people by means of television - a crime of blackmail and simulation. What penalty is laid down for such a hijacking? There is no way to rectify this situation and we must have no 60 1HE TIMISOARA MASSACRE illusions: there is no perverse effect, nor even anything scandalous in the 'Timi§oara syndrome'. It is simply the (immoral) truth of news, the secret purpose [destination] of which is to deceive us about the real, but also to undeceive us about the real. There is no worse mistake than taking the real for the real and, in that sense, the very excess of media illusion plays a vital disillusioning role. In this way, news could be said to undo its own spell by its effects and the violence of information to be avenged by the repudiation and indifference it engenders. Just as we should be unreservedly thankful for the existence of politicians, who take on themselves the responsibility for that wearisome function, so we should be grateful to the media for existing and taking on themselves the triumphant illusionism of the world of communications, the whole ambiguity of mass culture, the confusion of ideologies, the stereotypes, the spectacle, the banality - soaking up all these things in their operation. While, at the same time, constituting a permanent test of intelligence, for where better than on television can one learn to question every picture, every word, every commentary? Television inculcates indifference, distance, scepticism and unconditional apathy.Through the world's becoming-image, it anaesthetizes the imagination, provokes a sickened abreaction, together with a surge of adrenalin which induces total disillusionment. Television and the media would render reality [le reel] dissuasive, were it not already so. And this represents an absolute advance in the consciousness - or the cynical unconscious - of our age. 61 The illusion of war Exchanging war for the signs of war. America conducted the Gulf War as though it were a nuclear conflict, and thus, ultimately, as a substitute for a Third World War which did not take place. An atomic war without the atom, but analogous in its impact, instantaneousness, non-confrontation and convulsive effect. The first strike is the last. That, at least, is how the nuclear shoot-out was supposed to be, but neither of the two adversaries ever risked it, perhaps because, deep down, they neither of them believed in it. The nuclear shoot-out, the game of deterrence, was a scenario, just made credible by the calculated threat of the balance of terror. When the prospect of an atomic clash disappeared once and for all, when it got lost in space with Star Wars, it had to be tested in simulated form, in a miniature war-game where the possibility of annihilating the enemy could be checked out. But, symptomatically, care was taken not to go that far: Saddam, who will, in the end, have been nothing but that fairground dummy you shoot at from point-blank range, had to be saved. It was just a second-hand scenario. So this military 'orgy' wasn't an orgy at all. It was an orgy of simulation, the simulation of an orgy. A German word sums all this up very well: Schwindel, which means both giddiness and swindle, loss of consciousness and mystification. 62 THE ILLUSION OF WAR The Americans fought the same war in respect of world opinion - via the media, censorship, CNN, etc. - as they fought on the battlefield. They used the same 'fuel air' explosives in the media, where they draw all the oxygen out of public opinion. The amnesia about it is, in itself, a confirmation of the unreality of this war. Overexposed to the media, underexposed to memory. Built-in obsolescence, as with any consumer article . . . Forgetting is built into the event itself in the profusion of information and details, just as obsolescence is built into the object in the profusion of useless accessories. If you take one-thousandth of what you see on the TV news to heart, you're done for. But television protects us from this. Its immunizing, prophylactic use protects us from an unbearable responsibility. Its effect and its images self-destruct in the mind. So is this the zero degree of communication? Certainly, it is: people fear communication like the plague. There was no exulting after the Gulf War either (and yet, it was a victory, wasn't it?). There was, rather, a flight into amnesia and hypocrisy. A botched operation, even in surgical terms: its labours produced nothing, even the two hundred thousand dead produced nothing, apart from that marvellous miscarriage, the New World Order. It was a war without results, but not without an aftermath. Once past the dilemma of the reality/unreality of the war, we are back in the pure and simple reality of political ignominy, in the most odious Realpolitik: the Shi'ites, the Kurds, the calculated survival of Saddam . . . Here, the most fervent defenders of the war's reality end up conceding that perhaps nothing has in fact happened. But they prejudge this from the absence of an outcome; they do not judge the event itself. Which shows them to be just as much engaged in Realpolitik as anyone else. The question is not whether one is for or against war, but whether one is for or against the reality of war. Analysis must not be sacrificed to the expression of anger. It has to be directed in its entirety against reality, against manifestness - here against the 63 THE ILLUSION OF WAR manifest reality of this war. The Stoics contest the very self evidence of pain, when the body's confusion is at its height. Here, we must contest the very self-evidence of war, when the confusion of the real is at its height. We must hit out at the weak point of reality. It's too late afterwards: you're stuck with the 'acts of violence', stuck i.p realist abjection. In a little time, as we get some distance from it, or even now, with a little imagination, it will be possible to read La guerre du Golfe n'a pas eu lieu* as a science-fiction novel, as the anticipation, right in the thick of things, of the event as a fictional scenario - something into which it will surely be turned later. Like Borges' chronicling of cultures which never existed. By making transparent the non-event of the war, you give ·it force in the imagination - somewhere other than in the 'real time' of news where it simply peters out. You give force to the illusion of war, rather than become an accessory to its false reality. Anyhow, the book has fallen - quite logically - into the same black hole as the war. It has faded as quickly as the event whose absence it denounced. It was a successful non-event, like the Agency, like appearing on television. All this is as it should have been since it dealt with something which did not take place. It was the simulacrum of Helen that was at the heart of the Trojan War. The Egyptian priests had held on to the original (we do not know what became of it) when she set out again with Paris for Troy. But, even without the magic of the priests, Helen was in any case merely a simulacrum, since the universal form of beauty is as unreal as gold, the universal form of all commodities. Every universal form is a simulacrum, since it is the simultaneous equivalent of all the others - something it is impossible for any real being to be. There are many analogies between the Trojan and Gulf wars. Before the expedition, Menelaus called all the warriors of the Greek world to arms, just as Bush did with all the nations of the .. J. Baudrillard, Paris: Galilee, 1991. 64 TIIE ILLUSION OF WAR 'free world'. The incubation period of the war was very long (seven years in the case of Troy, seven months for the Gulf War) and the final phase was very rapid in both cases. The Greek victory was won at great cost to the victors, whom the gods punished relentlessly (the murder of Agamemnon, Clytaemnestra, Orestes, etc.). What will be the fate of the 'victors' of the Gulf War? Admittedly, this time the war did not take place. This difference leaves the Americans some hope, the gods having no real cause to avenge themselves. If the H len of the Trojan War was a simulacrum, what was the Gulf War's Helen? Where was there simulacrum here, except in the simulacrum of war itself? 65 Catastrophe management The end of history, being itself a catastrophe, can only be fuelled by catastrophe. Managing the end therefore becomes synonymous with the management of catastrophe. And, quite specifically, of that catastrophe which is the slow extermination of the rest of the world. We have long denounced the capitalistic, economic exploitation of the poverty of the 'other half of the world' [l'autre monde] . We must today denounce the moral and sentimental exploitation of that poverty - charity cannibalism being worse than oppressive violence. The extraction and humanitarian reprocessing of a destitution which has become the equivalent of oil deposits and gold mines. The extortion of the spectacle of poverty and, at the same time, of our charitable condescension: a worldwide appreci ated surplus of fine sentiments and bad conscience. We should, in fact, see this not as the extraction of raw materials, but as a waste-reprocessing enterprise. Their destitution and our bad conscience are, in effect, all part of the waste-products of history - the main thing is to recycle them to produce a new energy source. We have here an escalation in the psychological balance of terror. World capitalist oppression is now merely the vehicle and alibi for this other, much more ferocious, form of moral predation. One IJlight almost say, contrary to the Marxist 66 CATASTROPHE MANAGEMENT analysis, that material exploitation is only there to extract that spiritual raw material that is the misery of peoples, which serves as psychological nourishment for the rich countries and media nourishment for our daily lives. The 'Fourth World' (we are no longer dealing with a 'developing' Third World) is once again beleaguered, this time as a catastrophe-bearing stratum. The West is whitewashed in the reprocessing of the rest of the world as waste and residue. And the white world repents and seeks absolution - it, too, the waste product of its own history. The South is a natural producer of raw materials, the latest of which is catastrophe. The North, for its part, specializes in the reprocessing of raw materials and hence also in the reprocessing of catastrophe. Bloodsucking protection, humanitarian interfer ence, Medecins sans frontieres, international solidarity, etc. The last phase of colonialism: the N w Sentimental Order is merely the latest form of the New World Order. Other people's destitution becomes our adventure playground. Thus, the human itarian offensive aimed at the Kurds - a show of repentance on the part of the Western powers after allowing Saddam Hussein to crush them - is in reality merely the second phase of the war, a phase in which charitable intervention finishes off the work of extermination. We are the consumers of the ever delightful spectacle of poverty and catastrophe, and of the moving spectacle of our own efforts to alleviate it (which, in fact, merely function to secure the conditions of reproduction of the catastrophe market) ; there, at least, in the order of moral profits, the Marxist analysis is wholly applicable: we see to it that extreme poverty is reproduced as a symbolic deposit, as a fuel essential to the moral and sentimental equilibrium of the West. In our defence, it might be said that this extreme poverty was largely of our own making and it is therefore normal that we should profit by it. There can be no finer proof that the distress of the rest of the world is at the root of Western power and that the spectacle of 67 CATASTROPHE MANAGEMENT that distress is its crowning glory than the inauguration, on the roof of the Arche de la Defense, with a sumptuous buffet laid on by the Fondation des Droits de l'homme, of an exhibition of the finest photos of world poverty. Should we be surprised that spaces are set aside in the Arche d'Alliance* for universal suffering hallowed by caviar and champagne? Just as the economic crisis of the West will not be complete so long as it can still exploit the resources of the rest of the world, so the symbolic crisis will be complete only when it is no longer able to feed on the other half's human and natural catastrophes (Eastern Europe, the Gulf, the Kurds, Bangladesh, etc.). We need this drug, which serves us as an aphrodisiac and hallucinogen. And the poor countries are the best suppliers - as, indeed, they are of other drugs. We provide them, through our media, with the means to exploit this paradoxical resource, just as we give them the means to exhaust their natural resources with our tech nologies. Our whole culture lives off thi  catastrophic cannibal ism, relayed in cynical mode by the news media, and carried forward in moral mode by our humanitarian aid, which is a way of encouraging it and ensuring its continuity, just as economic aid is a strategy for perpetuating under-development. Up to now, the financial sacrifice has been compensated a hundredfold by the moral gain; But when the catastrophe market itself reaches crisis point, in accordance with the implacable logic of the market, when distress becomes scarce or the marginal returns on it fall from overexploitation, when we run out of disasters from elsewhere or when they can no longer be traded like coffee or other commodities, the West will be forced to produce its own catastrophe for itself, in order to meet its need for spectacle and that voracious appetite for symbols which characterizes it even more than its voracious appetite for food. It will reach the point where it devours itself. When we have finished sucking out the destiny of others, we shall have to invent one for ourselves. The * This is an allusion to the biblical 'Arche d'Alliance' (the 'Ark of ·the Covenant'), as well as an ironic reference to the use here being made of the arch at La Defense. 68 CATASTROPHE MANAGEMENf Great Crash, the symbolic crash, will come in the end from us Westerners, but only when we are no longer able to feed on the hallucinogenic misery which comes to us from the other half of the world. Yet they do not seem keen to give up their monopoly. The Middle East, Bangladesh, black Africa and Latin America are really going flat out in the distress and catastrophe stakes, and thus in providing symbolic nourishment for the rich world. They might be said to be overdoing it: heaping earthquakes, floods, famines and ecological disasters one upon another, and finding the means to massacre each other most of the time. The 'disaster show' goes on without any let-up and our sacrificial debt to them far exceeds their economic debt. The misery with which they generously overwhelm us is something we shall never be able to repay. The sacrifices we offer in return are laughable (a tornado or two, a few tiny holocausts on the roads, the odd financial sacrifice) and, moreovef, by some infernal logic, these work out as much greater gains for us, whereas our kindnesses have merely added to the natural catastrophes another one immeasurably worse: the demographic catastrophe, a veritable epidemic which we deplore each day in pictures. In short, there is such distortion between North and South, to the symbolic advantage of the South (a hundred thousand Iraqi dead against casualties numbered in tens on our side: in every case we are the losers), that one day everything will break down. One day, the West will break down if we are not soon washed clean of this shame, if an international congress of the poor countries does not very quickly decide to share out this symbolic privilege of misery and catastrophe. It is of course normal, since we refuse to allow the spread of nuclear weapons, that they should refuse to allow the spread of the catastrophe weapon. But it is not right that they should exert  at monopoly indefinitely. In any case, the under-developed are only so by comparison with the Western system and its presumed success. In the light of its assumed failure, they are not under-developed at all. They are only so in terms of a dominant evolutionism which has always 69 CATASTROPHE MANAGEMENf been the worst of colonial ideologies. The argument here is that there is a line of objective progress and everyone is supposed to pass through its various stages (we find the same eyewash with regard to the evolution of species and in that evolutionism which unilaterally sanctions the superiority of the human race). In the light of current upheavals, which put an end to any idea of history as a linear process, there are no longer either developed or under-developed peoples. Thus, to encourage hope of evolution - albeit by revolution - among the poor and to doom them, in keeping with the objective illusion of progress, to technological salvation is a criminal absurdity. In actual fact, it is their goocf fortune to be able to escape from evolution just at the point when we no longer know where it is leading. In any case, a majority of these peoples, including those of Eastern Europe, do not seem keen to enter this evolutionist modernity, and their weight in the balance is certainly no small factor in the West's repudiation of its own history, of its own utopias and its own modernity. It might be said that the routes of violence, historical or otherwise, are ·being turned around and that the viruses now pass from South to North, there being every chance that, five hundred years after America was conquered, 1992 and the end of the century will mark the comeback of the defeated and the sudden reversal of that modernity. The sense of pride is no longer on the side of wealth but of poverty, of those who - fortunately for them - have nothing to repent, and may indeed glory in being privileged in terms of catastrophes. Admittedly, this is a privilege they could hardly renounce, even if they wished to, but natural disasters merely reinforce the sense of guilt felt towards them by the wealthy - by those whom God visibly scorns since he no longer even strikes them down. One day it will be the Whites themselves who will give up their whiteness. It is a good bet that repentance will reach its highest pitch with the five-hundredth anniversary of the conquest of the Americas. We are going to have to lift the curse of the defeated - but symbolically victorious - peoples, which is insinuating itself five hundred years later, by way of repentance, into the heart of the white race. 70 CATASTROPHE MANAGEMENf No solution has been found to the dramatic situation of the under-developed, and none will be found since their drama has now been overtaken by that of the overdeveloped, of the rich nations. The psychodrama of congestion, saturation, super abundance, neurosis and the breaking of blood vessels which haunts us - the drama of the excess of means over ends - calls more urgently for attention than that of penury, lack and poverty. That is where the most imminent danger of catastrophe resides, in the societies which have run out of emptiness. Artificial catastrophes, like the beneficial aspects of civilization, progress much more quickly than natural ones. The under developed are still at the primary stage of the natural, unforesee able catastrophe. We are already at the second stage, that of the manufactured catastrophe - imminent and foreseeable - and we shall soon be at that of the pre-programmed catastrophe, the catastrophe of the third kind, deliberate and experimental. And, paradoxically, it is our pursuit of the means for averting natural catastrophe - the unpredictable form of destiny - which will take us there. Because it is unable to escape it, humanity will pretend to be the author of its destiny. Because it cannot accept being confronted with an end which is uncertain or governed by fate, it will prefer to stage its own death as a species. 71 The dance of the fossils The fuelling of the end of history, which is proceeding by the recycling of wastes of all kinds, is also being achieved by reinjecting all the vestiges of a world without history. A truly species-wide sense of remorse is inducing humanity to resurrect the whole of its past just when it is losing the thread of its memory. All the relics, all the traces which were shrouded in the greatest secrecy and which, by that token, formed part of our symbolic capital, will be exhumed and resuscitated: they will not be spared our transparency; we shall turn them from something buried and living into something visible and dead; we shall turn their symbolic capital into a folkloric, museum capital. Palaeontol ogy reigns, it would seem, over a kind of criminal unconscious of the species, since this race for fossils, this forced exploration bears a strange resemblance to the exploring of the fossils of the. unconscious. Each has about it the same ressentiment as to our origins, the same original repentance, an identical vague sense of criminal responsibility towards our ancestors and our fantasies. Nothing disappears, nothing must disappear: that is the watchword of this new therapeutic overzealousness, the over zealousness of memory and archaeology. * A hyperteliC' memory "' The notion of acharnement therapeutique, here translated as 'therapeutic over zealousness', has been at the centre of recent debates in France on the lengths to which doctors should properly go to keep patients alive, especially where life expectancy is short. 72 TI-IE DANCE OF TI-IE FOSSILS which stores all data in a constant state of instant retrievability, excluding any work of mourning, any resolution of the past. The Unconscious is already something of this kind. It knows neither past nor forgetting, is neither archaic nor archaeological. It is, indeed, on the contrary, a perpetual present, an instantaneousness of all psychic events, which show on its surface in a continual) potential passage a l'acte. Paradoxically, by dint of this zealous effort forcibly to bring back into the present what we no longer even remember, we live in a world which is both without memory and without forgetting. This is what heaven - or hell - must be like: the massive recall, at every moment, of all the patterns of our life. The penitentiary immortality, the carceral immortality of an unrelenting memory. If modernity, in its day, gave rise to anthropological exploration, post-modernity, for its part, has spawned a positive craze for the neolithic and the paleolithic. The extraction of relics has become an industrial undertaking. And it is, indeed, the great modern construction projects (high-speed trains, motorways, city develop ment) which keep these archaeological finds coming. Palaeontology is advancing at the same pace as the latest technology. Sites, relics, tools and bones: a whole stratum of signs, many thousands of years old, wrested back from oblivion. Thus, technology can pride itself on enriching the cultural heritage at the same time as it is destroying the territory. Ironically, we might say that we are watching the liberation of fossils, just like everything else. Berey, Silumian, Cassis, the dugouts, the bones, the wall paintings - relics are everywhere rushing to be discovered. They too want to express themselves. They have waited too long. This is not like America, which had no wish to be discovered at all, but the outcome is the same: everything discovered is wiped out. The fossils return from their immemoriality, and thus from humanity's secret memories, only to be immediately buried again in its artificial ones. No sooner exhumed than sequestered. All the originals are put under lock and key (the Lascaux caves, the Tautavel skull, the underwater 73 TI-IE DANCE OF TI-IE FOSSILS cave at Cassis). More and more things are exhumed to be immediately reinterred, snatched from death only to be cryogenized in perpetuity. Defence secrets: the underwater entrance to the Cassis cave was blocked up by the Navy and, in the same operation, the site scheduled a monument by the Ministry of Culture. A dismal attempt to sequester a collective memory that is everywhere on the slide. Thousands of works of art already slumber in safes, keeping the art market afloat. A striking demonstration that the abstraction of value is based on the subtraction of enjoyment. Even abstract forms, ideas and con cepts lie deep-frozen in the sanctuaries of Memory and Artificial Intelligence. As with Lascaux, only copies, photos, duplicates are placed in circulation. The Xerox degree of culture. In its way, Biosphere 2 is also an attempt ideally to sequester the species and its environment behind the crystal curtain of the forbidden gaze, the forbidden touch, safe from all real lusts of the flesh and prey to a definitive fetishism. Not only does this archaeological fetishism condemn its objects to become museological waste, a phenomenon contemporaneous with industrial waste, it also betrays a suspect nostalgia. It is because we are moving further and further away from our history that we are avid for signs of the past, not, by any means, in order to resuscitate them, but to fill up the empty space of our memories. Or perhaps man, in the process of losing track of his history, is seized by a nostalgia for societies without history, perhaps obscurely sensing that he is returning to the same point. All these relics which we call upon to bear witness to our origin would then become the involuntary signs of its loss. When faced with the cave paintings, the people of the eighteenth century would not believe in them. They saw them as a mystification got up by libertines to mock the Bible (it was said the caves ·had been painted to make people believe in a humanity antedating Christ). Today when, for want of any faith in Revelation, we require a certificate of origin, we are too keen to believe in them. If these relics did not exist, they would have to be 74 THE DANCE OF THE FOSSILS invented. All is explained by our unsated desire for authenticity, by the poverty of imagination of our modern societies. This explains why we cannot even pose the question of their authenticity since, even if true, they seem invented to satisfy the needs of the anthropological cause, to meet the superstitious demand for an 'objective' proof of our origin duly certified by carbon 14. In fact, their being discovered wrenches them instantly from their truth and secrecy to freeze them in the universe of museums, where they are no longer either true or false, but verified by a scientific fetishism which is an accessory to our fetishistic will to believe in them. In this respect they share the fate of many other things in our culture: arguments, works, events themselves have no other credibility than that deriving from their price on the imaginary stock-exchange of values. Our reasons for authenticating these relics are as unobjective as the eighteenth-century reasons for denying their authenticity. Then, they were seen as true simulacra. We accord them a false authenticity or, rather, a value which is indeterminable, since our desires play a part in it. Like those objects Freud speaks of, which, because they are closest to the female sexual organs, play that role in sexual hallucinations, we fetishize fossils and relics because they are closest to the lost origin and stand in for us as hallucinations of an origin. In fact, just as fetish objects conceal the refusal of difference and sexual jouissance, so the cult of fossils conceals a form of re!isentiment and of deep disavowal of the origin and the original secret. Besides, we immediately substitute a copy - the only version appropriate to our universe, where every original constitutes a potential danger and all singularity runs the risk of hindering the free circulation of value - thus, for example, Numa made twelve copies of the sacred shield, one for each tribe of Rome, and destroyed the original. We are not far from doing the same when we lock away the Tautavel skull in a bank vault or open up the simulacrum of the Lascaux cave to the public (we shall no doubt soon have to <;lose the second cave, an exact replica of the first; it seems that sitnulacra decay even more quickly than the originals. 75 THE DANCE OF THE FOSSILS We ought to think about building a third or a fourth version, at which point the present copy would immediately take on historical value). The fact that we are reduced to gazing at copies admittedly betrays the most profound contempt both for these objects and for ourselves. But, where reality is concerned, we have long contented ourselves with images, and where things are concerned, with copies. We secretly prefer not to be confronted with the original any longer. All we want is the copyright. Apart from the doubt automatically attaching to anything which turns up so wonderfully on cue (he it relics, scientific discoveries or historical events), and to anything which is, to some extent, invented by our own gaze, another anxiety arises where this enterprise of resurrecting all traces is concerned. Are we trapped in an exhaustive, obsessional recollection of all the moments the species has lived through? In a revival of all previous phases? In the detailed reconstruction of what would then seem like a crime (the appearance of life and the human race on earth), since it is only with crimes that such a relentless reconstitution is mounted? Is the whole of the future going to exhaust itself in the artificial synthesizing of the past? Who knows where this gigantic backward movement is leading? Is it an ephemeral phase in our post-history and therefore a cultural phenomenon, or a develop ment of much profounder import, relating to the fate of the species or even, beyond that, to oscillations of a cosmic type? (With the tadpole, once the high point of sexuation is reached, there is involution towards earlier forms of reproduction. Might human beings be reinventing biological cloning at the end-point of a sexed history? Death drive or a pulsation of a cosmic type?) At all events, this mass resurgence of fossils and relics is troubling, as troubling as the signs which used to appear in the sky presaging great events. We should be wary of all these phantoms ripped from their tombs. The information they provide about our past is a mask and I can already hear their sarcastic laughter. When our past has been exhumed, when all that had disappeared has reappeared, the dead will outnumber the living 76 TI-IE DANCE OF TI-IE FOSSILS and there will be the same imbalance as will come about when there is more computing matter [substance informatique] and artificial intelligence on earth than natural intelligence. Then we shall be cast into sidereal space, the space pf networks, ot into fossil space, the space of the kingdom of the dead . . . 77 Maleficent ecology The worst of it is that, in the course of this universal recycling of waste, which has become our historic task, the human race is beginning to produce itself as waste-product, to carry out this w<:>rk of waste disposal on itself. What is worst is not that we are submerged by the waste-products of industrial and urban con centration, but that we ourselves are transformed into residues. Nature - the natural world - is becoming residual, insignificant, an encumbrance, and we do not know how to dispose of it. By producing highly centralized structures, highly developed urban, industrial and technical systems, by remorselessly condensing down programmes, functions and models, we are transforming all the rest into waste, residues, useless relics. By putting the higher functions into orbit, we are transforming the planet itself into a waste-product, a marginal territory, a peripheral space. Building a motorway, a hypermarket or a metropolis automatically means transforming all that surrounds it into desert. Creating ultra-rapid communication networks imm diately means transforming human exchange into a residue. The example of Biosphere 2 is an eloquent one: in the image of ideal synthesis it wishes to provide of our planet, in its character as experimental artifact, it is a way of transforming our environment into an archaic residue, to be tipped into the dustbins of natural history. As for the dustbins of history themselves, they are not so much 78 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY full of events or outdated ideologies as of present events, immediately voided of their meaning by news, transformed into crusher residues, into a charnel-house of images. News is the excremental production of the event as waste; it is the current dustbin of history. There is nothing to counter the implacable rule which states that the virtual produces the real as its waste product. No ecology - no benevolent ecology - can do anything to stop it. It would take a maleficent ecology - one which treats evil with evil. Moreover, waste is today produced as such. We build huge office spaces which are intended to remain eternally empty (the spaces, like the people, are 'laid off'). We put up buildings that are still born, remnants which will never have been anything but remnants (our age no longer produces ruins or relics, only wastes and residues). Genuine monuments to disaffection with the human project, insofar as all that was asked of them was to provide employment, to keep the economic wheels turning for the time required by their useless construction. Perhaps it is they which stand as true testimony to this civilization - commemorat ing within its own lifetime an industrial and bureaucratic system that is already dead? Here again, history is taking a fantastic step backwards by building the ruins of the future, the ruins of an apparatus which continues to grow like a virtual waste-product. One can imagine entire towns put together not from the wastes of what has already served a purpose and therefore retained some trace of its previous usage, but of things that were waste 'from the outset' (this is already the case with generations of missiles, and with industrial plant and real estate), assured of never growing old or being revived in any memory - the phantoms of breakneck investment and even more rapid disinvestment. The production of waste as w(lste is accompanied by its idealization and its promotion in advertising. It is the same with the production of man as waste-product, which is accompanied by his being idealized and promoted in the form of human rights. Idealization always goes with abjection, just as charity always goes with destitution. This is a kind of symbolic rule. A new wave 79 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY of human-beings-as-waste ('boat people', deportees, the dis appeared, 'ghost-people' of all kinds) is accompanied by a new human rights offensive. Hence the recent proposal, following this same logic, from the moment it achieved the status of virtual waste-product, to accord nature international recognition of its rights, to elevate it to the status of a subject in law. Thus the 'contrat nature/'* amounts to a definitive recognition of nature as waste. Just as, in bygone days, the recognition of the rights of the unfortunate meant not their emancipation as citizens, but their liberation as the unfortunate. It is always the same with rights: the right to water, the right to air, the right to existence, etc. It is when all these fine things have disappeared that the law arrives to grant their disappearance official recognition. The law is like religious faith. If God exists, there is no need to believe in Him. If people do believe in Him,. this is because the self-evidence of his existence has passed away. Thus, when people obtain the right to life, the fact is that they are no longer able to live. When nature is recognized as a subject in law, as it is by Michel Serres, we have objectified it to death, and this ecological cover merely asserts our right to go on doing so. All this has been brought about by the highly dubious way in which the concept of nature has evolved. What was initially matter became energy. The modern discovery of nature consists in its liberation as energy and in a mechanical transformation of the world. After having first been matter, and then energy, nature is today becoming an interactive subject. It is ceasing to be an object, but this is bringing it all the more surely into the circuit of subjection. A dramatic paradox, and one which also affects human beings: we are much more compromised when we cease to be objects and become subjects. This is a trick that was pulled on us long ago, in the name of absolute liberation. Let's not pull the same one on nature. For the ultimate danger is that, in an interactivity built up into a total system of communication, there is no other; there are only subjects - and, very soon, only subjects without objects. All our problems today as civilized beings * A reference to the title of a work by Michel Serres. 80 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY originate here: not in an excess of alienation, but a disappearance of alienation in favour of a maximum transparency between subjects. An unbearable situation, all the more so for the fact that, in foisting on nature the status of a subject in law, we are also foisting on it all the vices of subjectivity, decking it out, in our own image, with a bad conscience, with nostalgia (for a lost object which, in this case, can only be us), with a range of drives - in particular, an impulse ·for revenge. The 'balance' we hear so much of in ecology ('out of balance') is not so much that of planetary resources and their exploitation as the metaphysical one between subject and object. Now, that metaphysical subject/ object balance is being upset and the subject, armed as he is with all the technologies of advanced communication (technologies on whose hor,izon the object has disappeared), is the beneficiary. Once that balance is disrupted, it inevitably sparks violent reactions on the part of the object. Just as individuals counter the transparency and virtual responsibility inflicted on them as subjects with unexplainable acts, acts of resistance, failure, delinquency and collective disorder, so nature counters this enforced - promotion, this consensual, communicational black mail, with various forms of behaviour that are radically other, such as catastrophes, upheavals, earthquakes and chaos. It would seem that nature does not really feel a sense of responsibility for itself, nor does it react to our efforts to give it one. We are, admittedly, indulging in a (bad) ecological conscience and attempting, by this moral violence, to stave off possible violence on nature's part. But if, by offering it the status of subject, we are handing it the same poisoned chalice as we gave to the decolonized nations, we ought not to be surprised if it behaves irrationally merely so as to assert itself as such. Contrary to the underlying Rousseauist ideology, which argues that the profound nature 'of the liberated subject can only be good and that nature itself, once emancipated, cannot but be endowed with natural equilibrium and all the ecological virtues, there is nothing more ambiguous or perverse than a subject. Now, nature is also germs, viruses, chaos, bacteria and scorpions, significantly eliminated from Biosphere 2 as though they were not meant to exist. Where 8 1 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY are the deadly little scorpions, so beautiful and so translucent, which one sees in the Desert Museum not far away, scorpions whose magical sting cet;tainly performs a higher, invisible - but necessary - function within our Biosphere 1 : the incarnation of evil, of the venomous evil of chance, the mortal innocence of desire (the desire for death) in the equilibrium of living beings? What they have forgotten is that what binds living beings together is something other than an ecological, biospherical solidarity, something other than the homeostatic equilibrium of a system: it is the cycle of metamorphoses. Man is also a scorpion, just as the Bororo are araras and, left to himself in an expurgated universe, he becomes, himself, a scorpion. * In short, it is not by expurgating evil that we liberate good. Worse, by liberating good, we also liberate evil. And this is only right: it is the rule of the symbolic game. It is the inseparability of good and evil which constitutes our true equilibrium, our true balance. We ought not to entertain the illusion that we might separate the two, that we might cultivate good and happiness in a pure state and expel evil and sorrow as wastes. That is the terroristic dream of the transparency of good, which very quickly ends in its opposite, the transparency of evil. We must not reconcile ourselves with nature. It seems that the more the human race reconciles itself with nature, the less it is reconciled with itself. Above and beyond the violence it inflicts on others, there is a violence specific. to the human race in general, a violence of the species against itself in which it treats itself as a residue, as a survivor - even in the present - of a coming catastrophe. As if it too were ready to repent of an evolution which has brought it such privileges and carried it to such exti:emes. This is the same conjuncture as the one to which Canetti refers, in which we stepped out of history, except that here we have not stepped out of history, but have · passed a point beyond which nothing is either human or inhuman * Arara is a name of Tupi origin for a bird of the genus Ara which includes the macaws (French: aras). 82 MALEFICENf ECOLOGY any longer and what is at stake, which is even more immense, is the tottering of the species into the void. It is quite possible that, in this process, the species itself is commencing its own disappearance, either by disenchantment with - or ressentiment towards - itself, or out of a deliberate inclination which leads it here and now to manage that disappearance as its destiny. Surreptitiously, in spite of our superiority (or perhaps because of it), we are carrying over on to our own species the treatment we mete out to the others, all of which are virtually dying out. In an animal milieu which has reached saturation point, species are spontaneously dissuaded from living. The effects produced by the finite nature of the earth, for the first time contrasting violently with the infinity of our development, are such that our species is automatically switching over to collective suicide. Whether by external (nuclear) violence or internal (biological) virulence. We are subjecting ourselves as a human species to the same experimental pressure as the animal species in our laboratories. Man is without prejudice: he is using himself as a guinea-pig, just a:s he is using the rest of the world, animate or inanimate. He is cheerfully gambling with the destiny of his own species as he is with that of all the others. In his blind desire to know more, he is programming his own destruction with the same ease and ferocity as the .destruction of the others. He cannot be accused of a superior egoism. He is sacrificing himself, as a species, to an unknown experimental fate, unknown at least as yet to other species, who have experienced only natural fates. And, whereas it seemed that, linked to that natural fate, there was something like an instinct of self-preservation - long the mainstay of a natural philosophy of individuals and groups - this experimental fate to which the human species is condemning itself by unprecedented, artificial means, this scientific prefiguring of its own disappear ance, sweeps away all ideas of a self-preservation instinct. The idea is, indeed, no longer discussed in the human sciences (where the focus of attention would seem, rather, to be on the death drive) and this disappearance from the field of thought signals that, beneath a frenzy for ecological conservation which is really 83 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY more to do with nostalgia and remorse, a wholly different tendency has already won out, the sacrificing of the species to boundless experimentation. A contradictory dual operation: man, alone of all species, is seeking to construct his immortal double, an unprecedented artificial species. He caps natural selection with an artificial super selection, claiming sole possession of a soul and a consciousness and, at the same time, he is putting an end to natural selection which entailed the death of each species in accordance with the law of evolution. In ending evolution (of all species including his own), he is contravening the symbolic rule and hence t.,ruly deserves to disappear. And this is without doubt the destiny he is preparing for himself, iri a roundabout way, in that, in his arrogant desire to end evolution, man is ushering in involution and the revival of inhuman, biogenetic forms. Here again, we have before us a reversive effect, running counter to any ideal or 'scientific' vision of the species. The idea running through the writings of Darwin that natural selection leads to a species capable of morally transcending natural selection is thoroughly specious. In aiming for virtual (technical) immortality and ensuring its exclusive perpetuation by a projection into artifacts, the human species is precisely losing its own immunity and specificity and becoming immortalized as an inhuman species; it is abolishing in itself the mortality of the fiving in favour of the immortality of the dead. It is immortalizing itself as the zero degree of a living species, as an operational artifact which no longer even obeys the law of species, except the law of artificial species, whose mortality is perhaps even more rapid. As a result, by going down these paths of artifice which were supposed to ensure its indefinite survival, it is perhaps hurtling even more quickly to its doom. The human species is currently domesticating itself, this time for good, by means of its technologies. It is submitting collectively to the same rituals as insects. Soon it will submit to the same controlled techniques of reproduction as the protozoa, will inflict on itself the same biogenetic (phylo- or ontogenetic) destiny to 84 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY which it has subjected others. It no longer, in fact, sees itself as different from the others, in spite of its supremacy. It treats itself as a species that may be ruthlessly exploited, condemned to a brutalization and annihilation of its own. Here again, all the advances it has made and has forced others to accept have had a reversive effect upon it. To such an extent that it - the guardian, in its zoos, museums, reserves and laboratories, of condemned species - regards itself as a condemned species, and keeps an anxious eye trained on its biospheric destiny. The finest example of what the human species is capable of inflicting upon itself is Biosphere 2 - the first zoological gardens of the species, to which human beings come to watch themselves survive, as once they went to watch apes copulate. Outside Tucson, in Arizona, right in the middle of the desert, a geodesic glass and metal structure accommodating all the planet's climates in miniature, where eight human beings (four men and four women, of course) are to live self-sufficiently, in a dosed circuit, for two years, in order - since we are not able to change our lives - to explore the conditions for our survival. A minimal representation of the species in an experimental situation, in a kind of spaceship allegory. As a museum mock-up of the future, but of an unpredictable future - a century hence, a thousand years, millions . . . who knows? - it forms a pendant to the Desert Museum some sixty miles away, which retraces the geological and animal history of two hundred million years. The point of convergence between the two being the idea of the conservation and optimal management of residues - of the relics of the past for the Desert Museum, the anticipated relics of the future for Biosphere 2 - not to mention the magical desert site which allows the problem of survival to be examined, both that of nature and that of the species with equal rigour. Such a very American hallucination this ocean, this savannah, this desert, this virgin forest reconstituted in miniature, vitrified beneath their experimental bubble. In the true spirit of Disney land's attractions, Biosphere 2 is not an experiment, but an experimental attraction. The most amazing thing is that they have 85 MALEFICENf ECOLOGY reconstituted a fragment of artificial desert right in the middle of the natural desert (a bit like reconstituting Hollywood in Disneyworld). Only in this artificial desert there are neither scorpions nor Indians to be exterminated; there are only extraterrestrials trained to survive in the very place where they destroyed another, far better adapted race, leaving it no chance. The whole humanist ideology - ecological, climatic, micro cosmic and biogenetic - is summed up here, but this is of no importance. Only the sidereal, transparent form of the edifice means anything - but what? Difficult to say. As ever, absolute space inspires engineers, gives meaning to a project which has none, except the mad desire for a miniaturization of the human species, with a view perhaps to a future race and its emergence, of which we still dream . . . The artificial promiscuity of climates has its counterpart in the artificial immunity of the space: the elimination of all spontaneous generation (of germs, viruses, microbes), the automatic purifica tion of the water, the air, the physical atmosphere (and the mental atmosphere too, purified by science). The elimination of all sexual reproduction: it is forbidden to reproduce in Biosphere 2; even contamination from life [le vivant] is dangerous; sexuality may spoil the experiment. Sexual difference functions only as a formal, statistical variable (the same number of women as men; if anyone drops out, a person of the same sex is substituted). Everything here is designed with a brain-like abstraction. Biosphere 2 is to Biosphere 1 (the whole of our planet and the cosmos) what the brain is to the human being in general: the synthesis in miniature of all its possible functions and operations: the desert lobe, the virgin forest lobe, the nourishing agriculture lobe, the residential lobe, all carefully distinct and placed side by side, according to the analytical imperative. All of this in reality entirely outdated with respect to what we now know about the brain - its plasticity, its elasticity, the reversible sequencing of all its operations. There is, then, behind this archaic model, beneath its futuristic exterior, a gigantic hypothetical error, a fierce idealization doomed to failure. In fact, the 'truth' of the operation lies elsewhere, and you sense 86 MALEFICENT ECOLOGY this when you return from Biosphere 2 to 'real' America, as you do when you emerge from Disneyland into real life: the fact is that the imaginary, or experimental, model is in no way different from the real functioning of this society. Just as the whole of America is built in the image of Disneyland, so the whole of American society is carrying on - in real time and out in the open - the same experiment as Biosphere 2 which is therefore only falsely experimental, just as Disneyland is only falsely imaginary. The recycling of all substances, the integration of flows and circuits, non-pollution, artificial immunity, ecological balancing, corttrolled abstinence, restrained jouissance but, also, the right of all species to survival and conservation - and not just plant and animal species, but also social ones. All categories formally brought under the one umbrella of the law - this latter setting its seal on the ending of natural selection. It is generally thought that the obsession with survival is a logical consequence of life and the right to life. But, most of the time, the two things are contradictory. Life is not a question of rights, and what follows on from life is not survival, which is artificial, but death. It is only by paying the price of a failure to live, a failure to take pleasure, a failure to die that man is assured of survival. At least in present conditions, which the Biosphere principle perpetuates. This micro-universe seeks to exorcize catastrophe by making an artificial synthesis of all the elements of catastrophe. From the perspective of survival, of recyclin!} and feedback, of stabilization and metastabilization, the elements of life are sacrificed to those of survival (elimination of germs, of evil, of sex). Real life, which surely, after all, has the right to disappear (or might there be a paradoxical limit to human rights?), is sacrificed to artificial survival. The real planet, presumed condemned, is sacrificed in advance to its miniaturized, air-conditioned clone (have no fear, all the earth's climates are air-conditioned here) which is designed to vanquish death by total simulation. In days gone by it was the dead wh.o were embalmed for eternity; today, it is the living we embalm alive in a state of survival. Must this be our hope? 87 MALEFICENf ECOLOGY Having lost our metaphysical utopias, do we have to build this prophylactic one? What, then, is this species endowed with the insane pretension to survive - not to transcend itself by virtue of its rn tural intelligence, but to survive physically, biologically, by virtue of its artificial intelligence? Is there a species destined to escape natural selection, natural disappearance - in a word, death? What cosmic cussedness might give rise to such a turnabout? What vital reaction might produce the idea of survival at any cost? What metaphysical anomaly might grant the right not to disappear - logical counterpart of the remarkable good fortune of having appeared? There is a kind of aberration in the attempt to eternalize the species - not to immortalize it in its actions, but to eternalize it in this face-lifted coma, in the glass coffin of Biosphere 2. We may, nonetheless, take the view that this experiment, like any attempt to achieve artificial survival or artificial paradise, is illusory, not from any technical shortcomings, but in its very principle. In spite of itself, it is threatened by the same accidents as real life. Fortunately. Let us hope that the random universe outside smashes this glass coffin. Any accident will do if it rescues us from a scientific euphoria sustained by drip-feed. 8 8 Immortality Curiously, all the assumptions, explicit or implicit, of Biosphere 2 link up with the issues raised in the Middle Ages by the problems of immortality and resurrection. Would bodies resuscitate with all their organs (including. the sexual ones), with their illnesses, their distinctive features, with all that made them specific living beings? We might widen the question today by asking whether we shall resuscitate with our desires, our wants, our neuroses, our un conscious, our alienation? With our handicaps, our viruses, our manias ? In its simulation of ideal resurrection, with all negative features eliminated, Biosphere 2 provides answers to all these questions. No viruses, no germs, no scorpions, no reproduction. Everything is expurgated, idealized, immunized, immortalized by transparency, disincarnation, disinfection and prophylaxis - exactly as in paradise. Moreover, if the medieval theologians were close to heresy when they enquired into the concrete forms of the resurrection of bodies, the officials at Biosphere 2 certainly make you feel any half-way detailed examination of the conditions of the experiment betokens the most evil intent. What is being set in place here is, in effect, the immortality of the species in real time. We long ago stopped believing in the immortality of the soul, a deferred immortality. We no longer believe in that immortality which assumed a transcending of the 89 IMMORTALITY end, an intense investment in the finalities of the beyond and a symbolic elaboration of death. What we want is the immediate realization of immortality by all possible means. At this millen nium end, we have all, in fact, become millenarian: we desire the immediate attainment of existence without end, just as the medieval millenarians wanted paradise in real time - God's Kingdom on earth. But we want this immortality here and now, this real-tirμe afterlife, without having resolved the problem of the end. For there is no real-time end, no real time of death. This is an absurdity. The end is always experienced after it has actually happened, in its symbolic elaboration. It follows from this that real-time immortality is itself an absurdity (whereas imagined immortality was not: it was an illusion). Biosphere 2 is an absurdity. For, at bottom, nothing takes place in real time. Not even history. History in real time is CNN, instant news, which is the exact opposite of history. But this is precisely our fantasy of passing beyond the end, of emancipating ourselves from time. And the CNN presenter locked away in his studio at the virtual centre of the world is the homologue of his Bio 2 brothers and sisters. They have all passed over into real time, the one into the real time of events, the others into real-time survival. And, of course, into the same unreality. It is doubtless because it has not been able to resolve the problem of the end (quite simply because it is insoluble) that humanity has turned its attention to the beginning. We have, so to speak, shifted our sights from the final conditions to the initial ones; we have moved from a vision of things in terms of their final state to a vision in terms of their genesis. Not in the sense of Genesis, of course, but in the sense of their being determined by their origin, of everything following a genetic sequence and being genetically manipulable. Against the illusion of the end and of final determinations, truth has become the truth of what precedes. The illusion of the end has been supplanted by the illusion of the ""use. In this perspective, there is no place for a finalistic "'Otion of immortality. We can no more think in terms of the   of the soul or the stars than Kepler could avoid 90 IMMORTALITY thinking in those terms. For him, that finality seemed entirely obvious; for us the very opposite seems entirely obvious. In this genetic order - or random disorder - which is ours, there is no longer any place for a finalistic conception of anything whatever. No end is conceivable, not even the end of history. We are reduced to working on what happens beyond the end, on technical immortality, without having passed through death, through the symbolic elaboration of the end. One can only arrive at a clear conception of immortality in a stable, unchanging universe. In a universe where a divine sanction ensures the eternity of the cosmic order (Kepler's universe), immortality is akin to a natural property of the human micro cosm. It is merely the logical extension of the continuity of an order. The universe could not change since all is ordained by a .higher decree. By contrast, as soon as that order begins to break up, as soon as that transcendence is lost, the cosmic order, like the human order, emancipated from God and all finality, becomes shifting and unstable; it falls prey to entropy, to the final dissipation of energy, and death. The happy consciousness of eternity and immortality is ended. The problem of the end becomes crucial and insoluble. There will no longer be an end. We enter upon a kind of radical indeterminacy. For not only is the tran cendent finality lost, it turns against itself, loses itself in upheavals, and even disrupts causes and the course of events. For all we might strive to forget the problem of the end, then, or circumvent it by artificial technical solutions,.. the end does not forget us. So long as there is a finalistic conception of life and death, the soul, the afterlife and immortality are given, like the world, and there is no cause to believe in them. Do you believe in reality [le reel] ? No, of course not: it exists but we do not believe in it. It is like God. Do you believe in God? No, of course not: God exists, but I don't believe in him. To wager that God exists and to believe in him - or that he doesn't exist and not to believe in him - is of such banality as almost to make us doubt the question, 91 IMMORTALITY while the two propositions 'God exists, but I don't believe in him' and 'God doesn't exist, but I believe in him' both, paradoxically, suggest that, if God exists, there is no need to believe in him, but that if he does not exist, there is every need to believe in him. If something does not exist, you have to believe in it. Belief is not the reflection of existence, it is there for existence, just as language is not the r flection of meaning, it is there in place of meaning. To believe in God is, therefore, to doubt his existence, his manifestness, his presence. It is to have a need to appeal to him, to produce him, to bear subjective witness to him. Now, why, if he exists, does he need our witness ? This amounts almost to thinking that God only exists by an impulse of the spirit, which is not far removed from blasphemy. In fact, faith is the spiritual impulse which reveals the profoundest uncertainty about the existence of God (but it is the same with all the theological virtues: hope is the spiritual impulse which betrays the deepest despair at the real state of things and charity the spiritual impulse which betrays the deepest contempt for others) . Belief i s superfluous, just a s Canetti says vengeance is super fluous; it is rendered unnecessary by the inexorable reversibility of things. In exactly the same way, passion is a useless supplement to the natural attraction between beings, and we might say the same of truth, which merely complicates appearances unnecessar ily. Belief is, then, merely an unnecessary complication of the question of the existence or non-existence of God. God, for his part, if he exists, does not believe in his existence, but he allows the subject to believe in it, and to believe he believes in it, or not to believe that - but not to believe he does not believe in it (Stravogin). Impenetrable labyrinth of belief, today broken down by the dissipation of the very notion of reality. It is no longer a question today of believing or not believing in the images which pass before our eyes. We refract reality and signs indifferently without believing in them. This is not even incredulity: our images simply pass through our brains ·without landing on the square marked 'belief', just as we pass through the political space without landing on the square marked 'representation'. We 92 IMMORTALITY merely refract the illusion of the political, in the same way as news merely refracts the media illusion of events (it does not, itself, believe in them), or as a mirror merely refracts your image without believing in it. As for credibility, which has taken the place of belief, it is a property not of the subject but of the object. It is the object which is credible. Or rather, if belief still presupposes an (imaginary) relation between subject and object, credibility, for its part, merely' supposes a relation between the object and the code. This is an important new twist, since it reflects what has also happened to immortality, which is no longer for us today a property of the subject but of the biological process. It is when immortality becomes an object of belief, when God, the soul, the afterlife and resurrection cease to be radical illusions and become objects of belief that they fall prey, by that same token, to philosophical critique. That critique does not attack the radical illusion, but a representation and a belief - that is, a relation already weakened by its ambiguity. It is because there is, ifi belief, an internal contest with incredulity that it becomes a vulnerable target and one tailor-made for philosophical criticism (that is why, in our view, the critique of the notion of belief is, in substance, ended, just as Marx said religion was ended: one must either cleave to radical illusion or radical indifference, eliminating the intermediate forms of belief). It is in his Gedanken uber Tod und Unsterblichkeit [Thoughts on death and immortality] that Feuerbach undertakes the decon struction of all this religious configuration of the afterlife, the immortality of the soul and resurrection. For the human race, this emancipation from all superstition signifies the recovery of its lost essence. But what will the human race do once free of any belief? It will either fulfil itself egoistically, obeying  n exclusive, sovereign individualism (Stimer), or do so collectively, by setting out on a long, historical course, as in Marx, or it will shift its sights to the Superhuman, through a transvaluation of the values of the species - this is the path marked out by Nietzsche, who argued that the human race cannot be left to itself, but must aim 93 IMMORTALITY beyond itself and discover the great metamorphosis - that of becoming. All these bodies of thought have had profound consequences for our world - none has turned itself into a reality. Each aims for an ideal transfiguration and allots a sovereign goal to the emancipated human race, aspiring to a 'beyond' which is no longer that of religion, but a 'beyond' of the human which remains within the human, humanity reaching beyond its own condition, achieving a transcendence which arises out of its own capacities - an illusion perhaps, but a superior illusion. Nietzsche has written magnificently of the vital illusion - not that of 'worlds beyond' [arriere-mondes], but the illusion of appearances, of the forms of becoming, of the veil and, indeed, all the veils which, happily, protect us from the objective illusion, the illusion of truth, from the transparent relation of the world to an objective truth, from the transparent relation of man to his own truth. This is the illusion of meaning, secreted by man when he takes himself to be the subject of history and the world. To which we can only oppose the illusion of the world itself, whose rules, admittedly mysterious and arbitrary, are nonetheless immanent and necessary. Contrary to the transcendent illusion of religions, the play of appearances is superhuman, which is to say that the human race can only attain sovereignty by a transvaluation of values; otherwise, it remains condemned to superstitious beliefs of all kinds, including the more modern ones of psychology and technology, including the superstitious belief in itself as the definitive species. Not immortal by glory, but definitive by the mastery of survival, by technical fetishism, by a domestication of itself which is merely the parody of the acceptance of its fate, by a biological manipulation which is merely the caricature of the transvaluation of values. Needless to say, this transvaluation of values of which Nietzsche speaks has not taken place, except precisely in the opposite,sense - not beyond, but this side of, good and evil, not beyond, but this side of, true and false, beautiful and ugly, etc. A transvaluation folding in upon itself towards a non-differentiation, a non distinction of values, itself fetishized in an aesthetics of plurality, 94 IMMORTALITY of difference, etc. Not any longer a fetishization of divinities, great ideas or grand narratives, but of minimal differences and particles. It is in this respect that fetishism has become radical: it has become minimal and molecular; it is no longer the fetishism of a form, but of a mere formula - subliminal, subhuman. The boundaries of the human and the inhuman are indeed blurring, yet they are doing so in a movement not towards the super human, but towards the subhuman, towards a disappearance of the very symbolic characteristics of the species. Verkliirung des Untermenschen. Transfiguration of the subman. What is currently taking place in transmutation's stead is a transcription of the Idea - including that of immortality - into its technical operation, a transcription of the human race itself into an immortal, artificial species, ensuring its genetic and generic sur.vival by all available means. Which shows Nietzsche in one sense t  be right: the human race, left to itself, is in fact only able to reduplicate or destroy itself. Not just by destroying its environment and its biological substratum, but by destroying its symbolic space and, more specifically, every vital illusion - the illusion of appearances, ideas, dreams, utopias, ideal projections, but also the illusion of concepts and representations, including those of death and of the body, which is disappearing more and more - as a result of the immediate effectuation of all these things instead of their symbolic elaboration. Destruction by unconditional actualization of all that was formerly merely a dream, a myth, an ideality, an appearance and which - whether destined to remain so or not - formed part of the symbolic equilibrium of life and death. This de-differentiation of the human and the inhuman, this reabsorp ion of the metaphor of life into the  etastasis of survival is effected by a progressive reduction to the lowest common denominator. At the level of genes, the genome and the genotype, the signs distinctive of humanity are fading; at least, they no longer have symbolic value, but merely a functional pur pose. No more transfiguration, no more metaphors: immortality 95 IMMORTALITY has passed over into the (biological, genetic) code, the only immortal token which remains, the only feature immortalized in living matter. We have the perpetual motion of the code, the metonymic eternity of cells. Generation by formulas, algebraic or genetic, has everywhere supplanted the play and destiny of forms. The worst thing is that the living beings generated by formula will not outlive their own formulas; they are therefore, from the outset, living on borrowed time. Paradoxically, it is the irruption of biology, tha  is, of the science of life, which marks this irruption of the non-living, marks an end to the transcending of the non-living by the living. Just as the irruption of psychology marks the end of the transcendence of the soul and its supplanting by an analytic deconstruction of the inner world. Just as the irruption of anatomical science marks the end of the body and death as metaphor and its entry on the scene as biological reality and fatality. I write 'entry on the scene' advisedly - the scene of objective truth, wbere the confusion by default between the human and inhuman, the living and the non-living, sex and the unsexed is played out. Whereas on the other scene - the scene of illusion and of forms - which is radically different from that of objective truth, is played out the transfiguration by excess of the human by the inhuman, of the living by the non-living, of sex by the unsexed. The original, Enlightenment humanism was based on man's qualities, his virtues, his natural gifts, his essence, together with his right to freedom and to the exercise of that freedom. Current humanism, which finds its highest expression in the new extension of human rights, is more concerned with the con servation of the individual and of man as a species (in the one case, immortality is a virtue; in the other, it is merely a right to conservation) . But human rights immediately 1'ecome problematic, since the question arises of the potential rights of other species, of nature, etc., in respect of which they have tb be defined. Now, does humanity even have rights over its own genome? What does it mean for a species to have the right to its 96 IMMORTALITY own genetic definition, and thus to its potential genetic trans formation? We share 98 per cent of our genes with the apes, 90 per cent with mice. What rights attach to this common heritage? On the other hand, it seems that 90 per cent of the human genome is of no account. Are we going to claim this obscure part which has no apparent purpose? As soon as the human is no longer defined in terms of freedom and transcendence but in terms of genes, the definition of man - and hence, also, that of humanism - is wiped away. The demarcation line of the human becomes increasingly elusive as we press on into the biological realm, into the molecular arcana of the biosphere. While Western humanism has felt threatened since the sixteenth century by other cultures bursting in upon it, the bolt currently giving way is no longer merely that of a culture, but of a species. Anthropological deregulation. And a simultaneous deregulation of ethics, of all the moral, juridical, symbolic rules which were those of humanism. The virtual transcendence of man, as distinct from his mortal body, evaporates with the advance of genetic engineering. Determination (or rather indeterminacy) becomes immanent in the mapping of the genome, and its manipulation. Can we still speak of souls and consciousness in referring to the automata, chimeras and clones we envisage carrying on the human species? Can we even speak of the unconscious, giv n the prospect of man coming to be defined genetically? Even the immortality of the unconscious, so dear to Freud, is seriously under threat. Not only the individual, ontogenetic capital, but the phylogenetic capital of the species is threatened by the evaporation of the limits of the human, which is no longer an evaporation into the divine, but into the inhuman and, indeed, not even into the inhuman but into something falling short both of the human and the inhuman - the genetic simulation of living beings. The gods, the soul and immortality, all those things which have been termed superstitions or fetishism, were still a spiritual, metaphorical extrapolation of man's faculties, including the body as a metaphor of resurrection. They were, admittedly, artifacts, but immaterial ones, and ones which retained a projective force, 97 IMMORTALITY along with the power and play of illusion. Whereas, with biology and genetics, we are in pure materiality, in the material simulation of objectively immortal beings, since they are made up of nuclear elements and a timeless genetic code. The artificiality is no longer that of a deferred end, but of a prosthesis - a literal fetishism, in the sense that it is the fetishism of the literalness of the same and its reproduction. We are no longer dealing with an imaginary prosthesis, with the superstition of a supra-temporal soul, but with a material prosthesis - a simulation much more destructive than the illusion of the soul. Moreover, the very illusion of the body, the play of appear ances of the body, is destroyed in the simulation of the functions of life; appearances are volatilized by genetic transcription. Another vital illusion disappears: that of thought, which is abolished in the instrumentalization of mental faculties, in the fetishism of artificial intelligence. There are several forms of death: a differentiated, dual, tragic form in the destiny of the higher mammals, which is linked to sexuality - in a way, a sexed form of death. And there is the asexual, undifferentiated form - a recessive stage which harks back to the molecular and protozoan stage of living beings, to their unceremonious obliteration, leaving them no other form of destiny. In the concentration camps, even more than life, it was death that was exterminated. The prisoners were dispossessed of their deaths - deader than dead, disappeared. But death can also be exterminated by the creation of indestructible life-processes. Which is what we are doing when we attempt to capture immortality in anatomical, biological and genetic processes. Locked into their undifferentiated forms, either by the definitive autonomization of multiple functions or by reduction to the smallest possible elements, the life processes become indestruct ible, and it is by the automatic working of these processes that we are exterminating death by easy stages. It was with this form of immortal life, this nostalgia for a pure contiguity of life [le vivant] and its molecular sequentiality, that Freud associated the death instinct. And it is to this kind of 98 IMMORTALITY immortality that we are condemned today, as we are condemned to an absence of destiny, to the negative immortality of what cannot end and thus reproduces itself indefinitely. In the past, man thought himself immortal, but he was not. Or rather he secretly doubted that he was not. Otherwise, he would not have needed to believe it. Today, we no longer believe we are immortal, yet it is precisely now that we are becoming so, becoming quietly immortal without knowing it, without wishing it, without believing it, by the mere fact of the confusion of the limits of life and death. No longer immortal in terms of the soul, which has disappeared, nor even in terms of the body, which is disappearing, but in terms of the formula, immortal in terms of the code. That is, we are beings for whom there will soon no longer be death, nor representation of death, nor even - and this is the worst - illusion of death. In its classical, glorious sense, immortality is the quality of what passes beyond death, the quality of the supra-living. In its contemporary version, it is the quality of the sur-viving, that is, of what is already dead and, by that token, becomes immortal, but not at all in the same way. It is no longer a fateful attribute; it is the banal attribute of what is no longer threatened with death since it is already dead. Of what no longer comes to an end since it has already passed beyond its own ends, beyond its possi bilities, into hypertely, so to speak, or into a 'surpassed' coma. That immortality is the worst of fates, for death was the finest of man's conquests - subjective, dramatized death, death ritual ized and celebrated, sought after and desired: by death, man distinguishes himself from all the other living species endowed with a natural immortality which, indeed, they share with the gods, whose immortal form is, initially, an animal one. The question is whether, beyond all vicissitudes of religion and matters spiritual, beyond all belief, we are not returning, by the extradition of death, to that basic immortality. Are we not going back, as a result of all our technologies, to a (clonal, metastatic) de facto eternity which was, formerly, the destiny of the inhuman ? But this functional immortality, instead of occurring in 99 IMMORTALITY a 'world beyond', which at least had the advantage of being another world, is happening in this world, our world, which has, consequently, become our 'world beyond'. The disappearance of the boundaries of the human and the inhuman, of the limits of life and death, has turned our world itself into a 'world beyond' - this time a definitive 'world beyond', since there is no alternative to it in a real world, since it is the real world. It has itself become the site of total superstition. 100 How can you jump over your shadow when you no longer have one? This compulsive desire for immortality, for a definitive immortality, revolves around a strange madness - the mania for what has achieved its goal. The mania for identity - for saturation, completion, repletion. For perfection too. The lethal illusion of perfection: hence these objects from which wear-and-tear, death or ageing have been eradicated by technology. The compact disc. It doesn't wear out, even if you use it. Terrifying, this. It's as though you'd never used it. It's as though you didn't exist. If objects no longer grow old when you touch them, you must be dead. There is no better way of illustrating this madness than ironically, by the story of the man walking in the rain with his umbrella under his arm. When asked why he doesn't open it, he replies: 'I don't like to feel I've called on all my resources.' This says it all. Calling on all your resources is completely wrong headed. To do so is to achieve immortality, but the immortality of the totalization, addition and repetition of yourself. Para doxically, calling on all your resources is the opposite of knowing how to come to an end. To reach your own limits is no longer to 101 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? have the end at your command. It means the abolition of death as vital horizon. It means losing your shadow. And so it means the impossibility of jumping over that shadow - how can you jump over your shadow when you no longer have one? In other words, if you want to live, you must not call on all your resources. Yet this is the ideal everywhere set before us today, by way of the techniques of self-maximization, of performance blackmail ing, of absolute realization of the human being as programme. The programming of all the genetic, biological, professional, existential variants of the individual. Going to the end of the programme, to the end of the tape! This way you arrive at a de facto immortality merely by forgetting the formula for stopping. Horizontal immortality, by acceleration and inertia, py exhaustion of possibilities, with the vertical cut-off of death no longer intervening. Even more illusory than all the transcendent forms of immortality, since it exhibits all the signs of material efficacy. Yet nature provides us with an opposite example by leaving two thirds of the human genome to lie fallow. One wonders what purpose these useless genes might serve, and why they should be forcibly decoded. What if they were only there to meet a requirement for a degree of leeway? If all the genes were functional, nothing would be wasted and we should be close to a total definition. It is perhaps to avert such a catastrophe that nature has provided this shadowy area. The same goes for language: the mass of floating signifier is what preserves language from calling on all its resources, which in turn preserves human beings from expressing everything and the world from signifying everything, from signifying in its totality. Yet this is precisely the aim today with computer technology, artificial intelligence, etc. : mobilizing all the neurons, all possible senses, and simultaneously reducing all margins, all the interstitial spaces. The trend in physics itself is towards the reduction of this interstitial void. It is the dream of that science to render matter totally concrete, to wrest all its energy from it by impelling it to limit-densities, densities artificial and monstrous. 102 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? What is it all about, then, this business of going as far as you can, exploiting all your resources, reaching your limits? It is a fantasy of death which leaves only the alternative of downfall and collapse. It is a strategy for wretches, for those who have so few means they are forced to exploit them to the full. It is a policy of self-exploitation one would never accept if it· were imposed by semeone else. It means cultivating servitude without the presence of the other, since each person substitutes himself for the other in the role of oppressor. The pinnacle of self-inflicted servitude. What will preserve us from this unlimited frenzy, this desire to abolish the horizon as perpetual line of flight, as virtual line of flight, which must remain virtual, but which we are precisely crossing today - towards that 'event horizon' beyond which nothing happens, nothing has meaning any longer and whence not even light escapes ? The intellectual field also functions like a system of crop rotation, with ground left untilled, fallow. It has a mortal dread of developing all its faculties. Thought is precisely what puts a brake on ideas, which, left to themselves, tend to spread out uncontrolled and occupy the whole of space. Ideas proliferate like polyps or seaweed and perish by suffocating in their own luxuriant vegetation. Th. !e is an idea horizon just as there is an event horizon: the horizon of their death-dealing accomplish ment, their absolute realization. Thought, for its part, leaks out into the void. History too has called on all its resources. That is why it can now only turn around or repeat itself. It has not managed to leak out into the void. That is why it has become interminable, leaving scope only for a negative immortality. The same goes for the social: we have attempted to mine the entire social sphere, to express it all, extort it all - we have tried to realize it by stripping it of any metaphorical dimension. This was to kill it by effusion, by diluting it into the real, by snuffing out its idea in the real. It is, invariably, totally wrongheaded to attain the real - real immortality, the reality of the social. The end gf metaphor, the absolute realization of all metaphors invariably marks the 103 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? twilight of the idea and the refusal of death in death-dealing accomplishment. A striking illustration of this killing of metaphors, dreams, illusions and utopias by their absolute realization, and of all ideas and transcendence by their material effectuation is provided by Canetti, who cites the example of the atomic bomb. He writes that, with Hiroshima and the dropping of the bomb, men put an end to the sun by harnessing its energy and materializing it on earth. They put an end to the illusion of the sun and its myth by mimicking the violence of its light and materializing it on earth in its radical form. * The real is, in fact, the last resource of metaphor, but that resource must not be c:alled on - on pain of death, on pain of losing its metaphorical power, its power of illusion. As in history, you have to keep your umbrella under your arm - a metaphor for the last chance - and not open it on any account. 'Every ecstasy ultimately prefers to take the path of renunciation rather than sin against its own concept by realizing itself' (Adorno). One of the aspects of this mania for accomplishment is the elevation to the universal, which is commonly regarded as progress, as constituting in a way the extensional equivalent of immortality. This extension actually amounts to a dilution and extenuation of values in the universal. The same goes for events: it is when they are disseminated worldwide that their intensity is at its weakest and they are most rapidly obsolescent. The universalization of facts, data, knowledge, information is a precondition of their disappearance. Every idea and culture becomes universalized before it disappears. As with stars: their maximum expansion comes at the point of death, their trans formation into red giants and then black dwarfs. The death agony of concentrated solutions in high dilution, the death agony of forms and images in high definition. This ending of cultures is not • The Canetti passage to which Baudrillard is referring can be found in The Human Province, trans. Joachim Neugroschel. London: Deutsch, 1985, pp. 66-7. 104 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? perceptible from within. From within, a culture is immortal; it seems to approach its end only in an asymptotic curve. It has, in fact, already disappeared. The elevation of a value to universality is a prelude to its becoming transparent, which itself is a prelude to its disappearance. There is no point, then, aiming for the universal, no point aiming for the heights, since there are no more heights. Erosion has done its work. If there is no longer any possibility of a philosophy of transcendence, since thought has been exiled to the other side of the looking-glass, there is no longer any possibility of conquering power either, since the political has been exiled to the other side of representation. There are no longer any heights to storm, either in the political domain or anywhere else, and the single-handed ocean crossings, which are our modern equivalent of climbing ,Annapurna, are posthumous fantasies. This is the same impossibility as that of jumping over your shadow when you don't have one. It's a metaphysical leap which is beyond us. Peter Schlemihl had at least sold his shadow to the devil; ours we have simply lost. This is because we have, in the meantime, become entirely transparent. Or because there is not even a source of light, a bright enough energy source, to give us a shadow. Our only shadow is the one projected onto the wall opposite by atomic radiation. These stencilled silhouettes pro duced by the Hiroshima bomb. The atomic shadow, the only one left to us: not the sun's shadow, nor even the shadows of Plato's cave, but the shadow of the absent, irradiated body, the delineation of the subject's annihilation, of the disappearance of the original. Another form of this identity mania is our contemporary individualism. Neo-individualism, bent on performance and entrepreneurial heroism, athletic individualism (Alain Ehrenberg) - possibly neo hedonistic, syncretic and tribal - bears no relation to the hero of bourgeois individualism. This latter, the hero of subjectivity, of breaking with the old, of free will and Stirner's radical singular ity, is well and truly dead. Even Riesman's 'self-directed' 105 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? individuality has disappeared from the horizon of the social as it has from the purview of the human sciences. The neo-individual is, by contrast, the purest product of 'other-directedness' : an interactive, communicational particle, plugged into the network, getting continuous feedback, · and with a clear vision of the podium in his mind's eye. Everyone is ready to turn themselves, depending on their various advantages or handicaps, into an autonomous micro-particle. And why not? This is the age of the daily invention of new particles. Why should the innumerable particles of our society not each demand their own identity and personal 'charm' ? Obviously, this gives rise to chaotic sets and Brownian motion, in which freedom is merely the statistical end product of impacts between singularities and no longer, therefore, in any sense a philosophical problem. This individual is not an individual at all. He is a pentito of subjectivity and alienation, of the heroic appropriation of himself. His only aim is the technical appropriation of the self. He is a convert to the sacrificial religion of performance, efficiency, stress and time-pressure - a much fiercer liturgy than that of production - total mortification and unremitting sacrifice to the divinities of data [/'information], total exploitation of oneself by oneself, the ultimate in alienation. No religion has ever demanded as much of the individual as such, and it might be said that. radical individualism is the very form of religious integrism. * The modern religion of self abnegation, of all-out operationality - the worst one of all since it recoups all the energy of irreligion, all the energy released by the eclipsing of traditional religions. This is the greatest irreligious conversion in history. By comparison with this voluntary holo caust, this escalation of sacrifice, the so-called return of religion which we pretend to fear - these occasional upsurges of religiosity or traditional integrism - is negligible. It merely conceals the fundamental integrism of this consensual society, the * For reasons of context, this expression is used to render the French 'integrisme religieux' which, in other circumstances, might quite properly be translated as 'religious fundamentalism'. 106 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? terroristic fundamentalism of this new sacrificial religion of performance. It masks the fact that society as a whole is moving towards religious metastasis. Religious effects are taken too seriously in their religious dimension and not seriously enough as effects, that is, as masking the true process. This is a screen tumour, a fixation abscess which, by focusing it, allows the evil to be exorcized at little cost, sparing the need to analyse the whole society, to analyse 'democratic' society, which is virtually con verted to integrism and revisionism, to security and protectionism and, at the same time, to the techniques of crude promotion and intimidation. This 'post-modern' individualism arises not out of a problematic of liberty and liberation, but out of a liberalization of slave networks and circuits, that is, an individual diffraction of the programmed ensembles, a metamorphosis of the macro-structures into innumerable particles which bear within them all the stigmata of the networks and circuits - each one forming its own micro-network and micro-circuit, each one reviving for itself, in its micro-universe, the now useless totalitarianism of the whole. In any case, in all registers - sex, culture, the economy, the media, politics - the concepts of liberty and liberation are diametrically opposed, unconditional liberation being the surest way of keeping liber-ty at bay. Liberty operates in a field that is limited and transcendent, in the symbolic space of the subject, where he is confronted with his own finality, his own destiny, whereas liberation operates in a potentially unlimited space. It is a quasi physical process (its prototype is the liberation or release of energy) which pushes every function, every force, every individual to the limit of its possibilities and even beyond, where it is no longer answerable for its own actions. That is why liberty is a critical form, whereas liberation is a potentially catastrophic form. The former confronts the subject with his own alienation and its overcoming. The other leads to metastases, chain reactions, the disconnection of all elements and, finally, the radical expropriation of the subject. Liberation is the effective realization of the metaphor of liberty and, in this sense, it is also 107 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? its end. There is no resolving the dilemma posed by these two. But the present system has found the final solution to both - in liberalization. Not the free subject any longer, but the liberal individual. No longer the liberation, but the liberalization of exchanges. From liberty to liberation, from liberation to liberal ization. The extreme point of highest dilution, minimal intensity, where the problem of liberty cannot even be posed any longer. And, in the process, the concept of alienation disappears. This new, cloned, metastatic, interactive individual is not alienated any longer, but self-identical. He no longer differs from himself and is, therefore, indifferent to himself. This indifference to oneself is at the heart of the more general problem of the indifference of institutions or of the political [le politique], etc., to themselves. The indifference of time: the non-distance between points in time, the promiscuity of points in time, the instantaneousness of real time. Boredom. The indifference of space: the televisual, remote-controlled contiguity and contamination of all points in space, which leaves you nowhere. Political indifference: the superimposition, the proliferation of all opinions in a single media continuum. Sexual indifference: indistinguishability and substitution of sexes as a necessary consequence of the modern theory of sex as difference. The individual's indifference to himself and to others is a mirror-image of all these other kinds of indifference: it results from the absence of division within the subject, the suppression of the pole of otherness, from the subject's being inscribed in the order of identity, which is a product, paradoxically, of the demand that he be different from himself and from others. For this identitary individual lives on the hymning and hallucinating of difference, employing to that end all the devices for simulating the other. He is the first victim of that psychologi cal and philosophical theory of difference which, in all spheres, ends in indifference to oneself and others. Difference is the infantile disorder of the subject (of our culture in general) and identity mania (the de-differentiation of self, 108 HOW CAN YOU JUMP OVER YOUR SHADOW . . . ? indifference to self) is its senile disorder. We have conquered otherness with difference and, in its turn, difference has suc cumbed to the logic of the same and of indifference. We have conquered otherness with alienation (the subject becomes its own other), but alienation has, in its turn, succumbed to identity logic (the subject becomes the same as itself). And we have entered the interactive, sidereal era of boredom. This identity syndrome has a particular form of madness specific to it. To the 'free' individual, the divided subject, there corresponds the vertical madness of yesteryear: psychical mad ness, the transcendent madness of the schizophrenic, that of alienation, of the inexorable transparence of otherness. To the identitary individual, that virtual clone, there corresponds a horizontal madness, our specific delirium and that of our whole culture: the delirium of genetic confrision, of the scrambling of codes and networks, of biological and molecular anomalies, of autism. No longer deliria of self-impairment or expropriation, but a delirium of self-appropriation - all the monstrous variants of identity - the delirium not of the schizophrenic but of the isophrenic, without shadow, other, transcendence or image - that of the mental isomorph, the autist who has, as it were, devoured his double and absorbed his twin brother (being a twin is, conversely, a form of autism a deux). Identitary, ipsomaniacal, isophrenic madness. Our monsters are all manic autists. As products of a chimerical combination (even where this is genetic), deprived of hereditary otherness, afflicted with hereditary sterility, they have no other destiny than desperately to seek out an otherness by eliminating all the Others one by one (whereas 'vertical' madness suffered, by contrast, from a dizzying excess of otherness). The ·problem of Frankenstein, for example, is that he has no Other and craves otherness. This is the problem of racism. But our computers also crave otherness. They are autistic, bachelor machines: the source of their suffering and the cause of their vengeance is the fiercely tautological nature of their own language. 109 Exponential instability, exponential stability The whole problem of speaking about the end (particularly the end of history) is that you have to speak of what lies beyond the end and also, at the same time, of the impossibility of ending. This paradox is produced by the fact that in a non-linear, non Euclidean space of history the end cannot be located. The end is, in fact, only conceivable in a logical order of causality and continuity. Now, it is events themselves which, by their artificial production, their programmed occurrence or the anticipation of their effects - not to mention their transfiguration in the media - are suppressing the cause-effect relation and hence all historical continuity. This distortion of causes and effects, this mysterioqs autonomy of effects, this cause-effect reversibility, engendering a disorder or chaotic order (precisely our current situation: a reversibility of reality [le reel] and information, which gives rise to disorder in the realm of events and an extravagance of media effects), puts one in mind, to some extent, of Chaos Theory and the disproportion between the beating of a butterfly's wings and the hurricane this unleashes on the other side of the world. It also calls to mind Jacques Benveniste's paradoxical hypothesis of the memory of water. This latter becomes fascinating when we draw 1 1 0 EXPONENTIAL INSTABILITY, EXPONENTIAL STABILITY the parallels with our present world: through the extension of media and the means of communication, we too inhabit a highly diluted social and cultural universe in which the original molecules are increasingly rare. It would be interesting to know whether, in the human order too, effects persist in the absence of causes, whether a nominal substance remains active in the absence of its elements or even whether something can exist apart from any origin and reference. This is the problem of a logic of effects which is different from that of causes or perhaps simply of another causality than that of substances and forces - of an efficient causality of forms (some strange attractor?) out of all proportion with normal causal efficacy, and equivalent to the virtual efficacy of absent molecules. In this sense, we should no longer have to look for new energies in the material unleashing of substances but in the unconditional sequencing of forms. Perhaps history itself has to be regarded as a chaotic formation, in which acceleration puts an end to linearity and the turbulence created by acceleration deflects history definitively from its end, just as such turbulence distances effects from their causes. We shall not reach the destination, even if that destination is the Last Judgement, since we are henceforth separated from it by a variable refraction hyperspace. The retroversion of history could very well be interpreted as a turbulence of this kind, due to the hastening of events which reverses and swallows up their course. This is one of the versions of Chaos Theory - that of exponential instability and its uncontrollable effects. It accounts very well for the 'end' of history, interrupted in its linear or dialectical movement by that catastrophic singularity which expresses itself in the exceptional form taken by contemporary events: these are both dramatic 'and insignificant, impatient to occur and indiffer ent to themselves (and to all of us). And it accounts, at the same time, for the impossibility of being done with history. But the exponential instability version is not the only one. The other is that of exponential stability. This latter defines a state in which, no matter where you start out, you always end up at the same point. The initial conditions, the original singularities do 1 1 1 EXPONENTIAL INSTABILITY, EXPONENTIAL STABILITY not matter: everything tends towards the Zero point - itself also a strange atttactor. None of the potentialities develops, whereas in exponential instability they extrapolate demonically. In exponen tial stability, there is therefore no end, not from effects becoming excessive and unpredictable, but because everything is already there, everything has already taken place. We are thus immortal survivors, since the second existence is without end. It has no end because the end is already in the beginning. This is, therefore, a paradoxical immortality. 'The bomb exploded long ago, at Hiroshima. The process of de humanization is complete and the dear effect of this phenomenon is that we no longer possess the psychical, ethical and spiritual resources which would enable us to realize this fact' (Romain Gary). Though incompatible, the two hypotheses - exponential instability and stability - are in fact simultaneously valid. Moreover, our system, in its normal - normally catastrophic - course combines them very well. It combines in effect an inflation, a galloping acceleration, a dizzying whirl of mobility, an eccentricity of events and an excess of meaning and information with an exponential tendency towards total entropy. Our systems are thus doubly chaotic: they operate both by exponential stability and instability. It would seem then that there will be no end because we are already in an excess of ends: the transfinite. And in an exceeding of finalities: transfinality. It is this excess which creates endless turbulence, indeed an involution and spiral disaggregation of time and history. A disturbance is not, however, necessarily enigmatic. Sensitivity to initial conditions (Cleopatra's nose or the beating of a butterfly's wings) should not be confused, on the grounds that they are both incalculable, with fate or predestination. In'deed, precisely the opposite might be said to be true, insofar as predestination is, much rather, a hypersensitivity to the final conditions of a process, not to the initial ones. This is what makes a fateful - and not simply a chaotic or unpredictable - 1 12 EXPONENTIAL INSTABILITY, EXPONENTIAL STABILITY configuration. In predestination, the end is there before the beginning and every effort to move away from the end brings that end closer: this is why it is tragic an  irqnic in character, and not merely eccentric or catastrophic, as in the patterns of chaos. Meteorology is chaotic; it is not a figure of destiny. All the extreme phenomena, the exorbitant effects, the vertiginous forms of disorder, everything which attests to the precession of effects over causes is fascinating, but not spiritually enthralling (and, here, we should have to include in the same order of forms the precession of models over the real, a phenomenon which encapsulates our modern 'destiny', the destiny of simulation which one may, in effect, read as a form of catastrophe of reality, this dizzying whirl of the model, the virtual and simulation carrying us further and further from the initial conditions of the real world). It is a logic of perverse effects (though some of these are beneficial), but it has nothing of a fatal strategy about it, since this latter requires a secret, but contradictory, will and a presentiment of total reversibility. Chaos is a parody of any metaphysics of destiny. It is not even an avatar of such a metaphysics. The poetry of initial conditions fascinates us today, now that we no longer possess a vision of final conditions, and Chaos stands in for us as a negative destiny. The strangeness of the strange attractor is merely a metaphor; the r-adical strangeness lies in the enigmatic duality of a world and in the inexorable contradiction (that of our will and its loss) which keeps up the indestructible illusion. Destiny is the ecstatic figure of necessity. Chaos is merely the metastatic figure of Chance. Chaotic processes are random and statistical in nature and, even if they culminate in the hidden order of strange attractors, that still has nothing to do with the fulgurating notion of destiny, the absence of which is cruelly felt. It could even, no doubt, be said that only when destiny is absent do things begin to proliferate in all directions, only when there is no fateful resolution do the random equations of Chaos proliferate. Our complex, metastatic, viral systems, condemned to the exponential dimension alone (be it that of exponential stability or instability), to eccentricity and indefinite fractal scissiparity, can ll3 no longer come to an end. Condemned to an intense metabolism, to an intense internal metastasis, they become exhausted within themselves and no longer have any destination, any end, any otherness, any fatality. They are condemned, precisely, to the epidemic, to the endless excrescences of the fractal and not to the reversibility and perfect resolution of the fateful [fatafj . We know only the signs of catastrophe now; we no longer know the signs of destiny. (And besides, has any concern been shown in Chaos Theory for the equally extraordinary, contrary phenomenon of hyposensitivity to initial conditions, of the inverse exponentiality of effects in relation to causes - the potential hurricanes which end in the beating of a butterfly's wings?) 1 14 Hysteresis of the millennium We are, self-evidently, entering upon a retroactive form of history, and all our ideas, philosophies and mental techniques are progressively adapting to that model. We may perhaps even see this as an adventure, since the disappearance of the end is in itself an original situation. It seems to be characteristic of our culture and our history, which cannot e en manage to come to an end, and are, as a result, assured of an indefinite recurrence, a backhanded immortality. Up to now, immortality has been mainly that of the beyond, an immorta1ity yet to come, but we are today inventing another kind in the here and now, an immortality of endings receding to infinity. The situation is, perhaps, an original one, but clearly, so far as the final result is concerned, the game is already lost. We shall never experience the original chaos, the Big Bang: the file is closed on that; we weren't there. But, where the final moment is concerned - the Big Crumb - we might have some hope of seeing that. Some hope of enjoying the end, to make up for not being able to enjoy the origin. These are the only two interesting moments and, since we have been denied the first, we might as well put all our energies into accelerating the end, into hastening things to their definitive doom, which we could at least consume as spectacle. Just imagine the extraordinary good luck of the generation which would have the end of the world to itself. It is 1 15 HYSTERESIS OF TI:IE MILLENNRJM every bit as marvellous as being present at the beginning. But we came too late for the beginning. Only the end seemed to be within our means. We had come close to this possibility with the atomic age. Alas, the balance of terror suspended the ultimate event, then post poned it for ever( ?) and, now deterrence has succeeded, we have to get used to the idea that there is no end any longer, there will no longer be any end, that history itself has become interminable. Thus, when we speak of the 'end of history', the 'end of the political', the 'end of the social', the 'end of ideologies', none of this is true. The worst of it all is precisely that there will be no end to anything, and all these things will continue to unfold slowly, tediously, recurrently, in that hysteresis of everything which, like nails and hair, continues to grow after death. Because, at bottom, all these things are already dead and, rather than have a happy or tragic resolution, a destiny, we shall have a thwarted end, a homeopathic end, an end distilled into all the various metastases of the refusal of death. The metastases of all that. resurfaces as history goes back over its own tracks in a compulsive desire for rehabilitation, as though with regard to some crime or other (a crime committed by us, but in spite of ourselves, a crime of the species against itself, by a process which is quickening with contemporary history, a crime of which universal waste, universal repentance and universal ressentiment are, today, the surest signs), a crime on which the file has to be reopened, which necessarily involves going back into the past, right back to origins if necessary, where, for want of being able to find a resolution of our destiny in the future, we seek a retrospective absolution. We absolutely have to know what went wrong at a certain point and, hence, explore all the vestiges of the path we have travelled, root through the dustbins of history, revive both the best and the worst in the vain hope of separating good from evil. To return to Canetti's hypothesis  we have to get back beyond a fateful demarcation line which, in history too, might separate the human from the inhuman, a line which we might be said to have thoughtlessly crossed, in the dizzying whirl of some liberation of the species or other. It seems as though, caught up in a collective 1 16 HYSTERESIS OF THE MILLENNIUM panic over this blind spot at which we passed out of history and its ends (but what were those ends ? all we know is that we passed beyond them without noticing), we are hurriedly trying to get into reverse, in order to escape this state of empty simulation. Trying to relocate the zone of reference, the earlier scene, the Euclidean space of history. Thus the events in Eastern Europe claimed to set in train the onward march of peoples once more and the democratic process. And the Gulf War sought to reopen the space of war, the space of a violence that could establish a new world order. This is, in every case, a failure. This revival of vanished - or vanishing - forms, this attempt to escape the apocalypse of the virtual, is a utopian desire, the last of our utopian desires. The more we seek to rediscover the real and the referential, the more we sink into simulation, in this case a shameful and, at any event, hopeless simulation. By analogy with illnesses, which are perhaps merely the reactivation of previous states (cancer, for example, reproducing the undifferentiated proliferation of the first living cells, or viral pathology, which causes the earlier states of the biogenetic substance to resurface in moments when the body is weak and its immune defences low), can we not imagine that, in history itself, previous states have never disappeared, but present themselves again in succession, as it were, taking advantage of the weakness or excessive complexity of the present structures? However, these earlier forms never resurface as they were; they never escape the destiny of extreme modernity. Their resurrection is itself hyper-real. The resuscitated values are themselves fluid, unstable, subject to the same fluctuations as fashion or stock exchange capital. The rehabilitation of the old frontiers, the old structures, the old elites will therefore never have the same meaning. If, one day, the aristocracy or royalty recover their old position, they will, nonetheless, be 'post-modern'. None of the 'retro' scenarios that are being got up has any historical significance: they are occurring wholly on the surface of our age, as though all images were being superimposed one upon another, but with no change to the actual course of the film. Relapsed 1 1 7 HYSTERESIS OF TIIB MILLENNIUM events: defrosted democracy, trompe-l'oeil freedoms, the New World Order cellophane-wrapped and ecology in mothballs, with its immune-deficient human rights. None of these will make any difference to the present melancholy of the century, which we shall never get right through, since it will, in the meantime, have swung around and headed off in the opposite direction. This is all, at bottom, a triumph for Walt Disney, that inspired precursor of a universe where all past or present forms meet in a playful promiscuity, where all cultures recur in a mosaic (including the cultures of the future, which are themselves already recurrent). For a long time we thought this was all imaginary, that is, derivative and decorative, puerile and marginal. But we are going to see that it was something like a prefiguration of the real trend of things - Disneyworld opening up for us the bewildering perspective of passing through all the earlier stages, as in a film, with those stages hypostasized in a definitive juvenility, frozen like Disney himself in liquid nitrogen: Magic Country, Future World, Gothic, Hollywood itself reconstituted fifty years on in Florida, the whole of the past and the future revisited as living simulation. Walt Disney is the true hero of deep-freezing, with his utopian hope of awakening one day in the future, in a better world. But that is where the irony bites: he had not foreseen that reality and history would turn right around. And he, who expected to wake up in the year 2100, might well, following out his own fairytale scenario, awaken in 1730 or the world of the Pharaohs or any one of his many primal scenes. We wondered what the point of this coming fin de siecle might be. Here we have it: the sale of the century. History is being sold off, as is the end of history. Communism is being sold off, as is the end of communism. Communism will have had no historical end; it will have been sold off, knocked down like useless stock. Just like the Russian army, sold off at the four corners of the earth - an unprecedented event relegated to the status of a banal market operation. All Western ideologi s are knocked down too; they can be had at bargain prices in all latitudes. 1 18 HYSTERESIS OF THE MILLENNIUM The sales used to come after the feast days but now they precede them. It's the same with our century: we are anticipating the end - everything must go, everything has to be sold off. We learn, for example, that, alongside the great Red Army stock clearance, the industrial laboratories are currently 'selling off' the human genome, which they are copyrighting and commercializing sequence by sequence. Here again, everything must go, even if we don't know what these genes are for. Things must not be allowed to reach their natural term. They have first to be cryogenized, in order to ensure them a virtual, derisory immortality. Messianic hope was based on the reality of the Apocalypse. But this latter has no more reality than the original Big Bang. We shall never be allowed this dramatic illumination. Even the idea of putting an end to our planet by an atomic clash is futile and superfluous. If it has no meaning for anyone, God or man, then what is the point? Our Apocalypse is not real, it is virtual. And it is not in the future, it is here and now. Our orbital bombs, even if they did not mean a natural end, were at least manufactured by us, designed, as it seems, the better to end it all. But, in actual fact, that is not how it was: they were made the better to be rid of the end. We have now put that end into satellite form, like all those finalities which, once transcendent, have now become purely and simply orbital. It circles around us, and will continue to do so tirelessly. We are encircled by our own end and incapable of getting it to land, of bringing it back to earth. This is like the parable of the Russian cosmonaut forgotten in space, with no one to welcome him, no one to bring him back - the sole particle of Soviet territory ironically overflying a deterritorialized Russia. Whereas on earth everything has changed, he becomes practically impiortal and continues to circle like the gods, like the stars, like nuclear waste. Like so many events, of which he is the perfect illustration, which continue to circle in the empty space of news [l'infor111ation], without anyone being able or willing to bring them back into historical space. A perfect image of all those things which continue their uncompromising performance in orbit, but have 1 19 HYSTERESIS OF 1HE MILLENNillM lost their identity along the way. Our history, for example, has also got lost along the way and revolves around us like an artificial satellite. Nostalgia for the lost object? Not even that. Nostalgia had beauty because it retained within it the presentiment of what has taken place and could take place again. It was as beautiful as utopia, of which it is the inverted mirror. It was beautiful for never being satisfied, as was utopia for never being achieved. The sublime reference to the origin in nostalgia is as beautiful as the reference to the end in utopia. It is something else again to be confronted with the literal manifestness of the end (of which we can no longer dream as end), and the literal manifestness of the origin (of which we. can no longer dream as origin). Now, we have the means today to put into play both our origins and our end. We exhume our origins in a·rchaeology, reshape our original capital through genetics, and operationalize our dreams and the wildest utopias by means of science and technology. We appease our nostalgia and our utopian desires in situ and in vitro. We are, then, unable to dream of a past or future state of things. Things are in a state which is literally definitive - neither finished, nor infinite, nor definite, but de-finitive that is, deprived of its end. Now, the feeling which goes with a definitive state, even a paradisiac one - is melancholic. Whereas, with mourning, things come to an end and therefore enjoy a possibility of returning, with melancholia we are not even left with the presentiment of an end or of a return, but only with ressentiment at their disappearance. The crepuscular profile of the 'fi.n de siecle is more or less of this order, combining the features of a linear order of progress and a regression, itself also linear, of ends and values. Against this general movement, there remains the completely improbable and, no doubt, unverifiable hypothesis of a poetic reversibility of events, more or less the only evidence for which is the existence of the same possibility in language. The poetic form is not far removed from the chaotic form. Both 120 HYSTERESIS OF THE MILLENNIUM flout the law of cause and effect. If, in Chaos Theory, for sensitivity to initial conditions we substitute sensitivity to final conditions, we are in the form of predestination, which is the form of fate [le destin]. Poetic language also lives with pre destination, with the imminence of its own ending and of reversibility between the ending and the beginning. It is pre destined in this sense - it is an unconditional event, without meaning and consequence, which draws its whole being from the dizzying whirl of final resolution. It is certainly not the form of our present history and yet there is an affinity between the immanence of poetic development and the immanence of the chaotic development which is ours today, the unfolding of events which are themselves also without meaning and consequence and in which - with effects substituting themselves for causes - there are no longer any causes, but only effects. The world is there, effectively. There is no reason for this, and God is dead. If nothing exists now but effects, we are in a state of total illusion (which is also that of poetic language). If the effect is in the cause or the beginning in the end, then the catastrophe is behind us. This reversing of the sign of catastrophe is the exceptional privilege of our age. It liberates us from any future catastrophe and any responsibility in that regard. The end of all anticipatory psychoses, all panic, all remorse! The lost object is behind us. We are free of the Last Judgement. What this brings us to, more or less, is a poetic, ironic analysis of events. Against the simulation of a linear history 'in progress', we have to accord a privileged status to these backfires, these malign deviations, these lightweight catastrophes which cripple an empire much more effectively than any great upheavals. We have to accord a privileged status to all that has to do with non linearity, reversibility, all that is of the order not of an unfolding or an evolution, but of a winding back, a reversion in time. Anastrophe versus catastrophe. Perhaps, deep down, history has never unfolded in a linear fashion; perhaps language has never unfolded in a linear fashion. Everything moves in loops, tropes, inversions of meaning, except in numerical and artificial languages 121 HYSTERESIS OF THE MILLENNIUM which, for that very reason, no longer are languages. Everything occurs through effects which short-circuit their (metaleptic) causes, through the Witze of events, perverse events, ironic turnabouts, except within a rectified history, which, for just that reason, is not a history. Might we not transpose language games on to social and historical phenomena: anagrams, acrostics, spoonerisms, rhyme; strophe and catastrophe? Not just the major figures of metaphor and metonymy, but the instant, puerile, formalistic games, the heteroclite tropes which are the delight of a vulgar imagination? Are there social spoonerisms, or an.anagrammatic history (where meaning is dismembered and scattered to the winds, like the name of God in the anagram), rhyming forms of political action or events which can be read in either direction? In these times of a retroversion of history, the palindrome, that poetic, rigorous form of palinode, could serve as a grille de lecture (might it not perhaps be necessary to replace Paul Virilio's dromology with a palin dromology?). And the anagram, that detailed process of un ravelling, that sort of poetic and non-linear convulsion of language - is there a chance that history lends itself to such a poetic convulsion, to such a subtle form of return and anaphora which, like the anagram, would - beyond meaning - allow the pure materiality of language to show through, and - beyond historical meaning - allow the pure materiality of time to show through ? Such would be the enchanted alternative to the linearity of history, the poetic alternative to the disenchanted confusion, the chaotic profusion of present events. In this very way, we enter, beyond history, upon pure fiction, upon the illusion of the world. The illusion of our history opens . on to the greatly more radical illusion of the world. Now we have closed the eyelids of the Revolution, closed our eyes on the Revolution, now we have broken down, the Wall of Shame, now that the lips of protest are closed (with the sugar of history which melts on the tongue), now Europe , _ and memories - are no longer haunted by the spectre of communism, nor even by that of 122 HYSTERESIS OF THE MILLENNIUM power, now the aristocratic illusion of the ongm and the democratic illusion of the end are increasingly receding, we no longer have the choice of advancing, of persevering in the present destruction, or of retreating - but only of facing up to this radical illusion. 123   Columbia University Press Publishers Since  New York Chichester, West Sussex Copyright ©  Columbia University Press All rights reserved Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Baudrillard, Jean. The vital illusion / Jean Baudrillard ; edited by Julia Witwer. p. cm — (Wellek Library lectures) Includes index. isbn ––– . Reality. . Virtual reality. . Cloning. I. Witwer, Julia. II. Title. III. Wellek Library lectures at the University of California Irving. BD .B  —dc – Casebound editions of Columbia University Press books are printed on permanent and durable acid-free paper. Printed in the United States of America Designed by Audrey Smith c           This page intentionally left blank contents 1. The Final Solution: Cloning Beyond the Human and Inhuman  2. The Millennium, or The Suspense of the Year   3. The Murder of the Real  Notes  Index  The Vital Illusion This page intentionally left blank 1  The Final Solution: Cloning Beyond the Human and Inhuman This page intentionally left blank The question concerning cloning is the question of immortality. We all want immortality. It is our ultimate fan- tasy, a fantasy that is also at work in all of our modern sci- ences and technologies—at work, for example, in the deep freeze of cryonic suspension and in cloning in all its mani- festations. The most notorious example of cryonic suspension is— naturally—Walt Disney, but he, at least, being destined for resurrection, is said to have been frozen whole, in his “integrity.” There are more anomalous situations today. Nowadays, in Phoenix, Arizona (the predestined site for Resurrection), only the heads are frozen, because it’s from the cells of the brain—regarded as the nucleus of individual being—that researchers hope to reconstitute the deceased in their bodily wholeness. (One can’t help but wonder why they don’t, in that case, simply preserve a single cell or a DNA molecule.) To complement these heads without bodies: On the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, headless frogs and mice are being cloned in private laboratories, in preparation for the cloning of headless human bodies that will serve as reservoirs for organ donation. Why bodies without heads? As the head is considered the site of consciousness, it is thought that bodies with heads would pose ethical and psychological problems. Better simply to manufacture acephalic creatures whose organs could be freely harvested, because such creatures would not compete with—or invoke too closely—the original human beings. These, then, are the experimental and artificial forms of cloning—not including Dolly, of course, and the rest of her kind. But spontaneous cloning, and in fact spontaneous immortality, can also be found in nature, at the heart of our cells. Ordinarily, a cell is destined to divide a certain number of times and then to die. If, in the course of its division, some- thing happens to perturb this process—for example, an alter- ation in the gene that prevents tumors or in the mechanisms governing cellular apoptosis—then the cell becomes cancer- the final solution 4 ous. It forgets to die; it forgets how to die. It goes on to clone itself again and again, making thousands of identical copies of itself, thus forming a tumor. Normally the subject dies as a result, and the cancerous cells die with him or her. But in the case of Henrietta Lacks, the tumor cells sampled from her body were cultured in a laboratory and will continue to pro- liferate endlessly. They constitute so remarkable and virulent a specimen that they have been circulated throughout the world and even sent into space, on board the U.S. satellite Discoverer . So it is that the disseminated body of Henrietta Lacks, cloned at the molecular level, makes its immortal rounds.  There is something occulted inside us: our death. But some- thing else is hidden there, lying in wait for us within each of our cells: the forgetting of death. In our cells our immortality lies in wait for us. It’s common to speak of the struggle of life against death, but there is an inverse peril. And we must struggle against the possibility that we will not die. At the slightest hesitation in the fight for death—a fight for division, the final solution 5 for sex, for alterity, and so for death—living beings become once again indivisible, identical to one another—and immor- tal. Contrary to everything that seems obvious and “natural,” nature’s first creatures were immortal. It was only by obtaining the power to die, by dint of constant struggle, that we became the living beings we are today. Blindly we dream of overcoming death through immortality, when all the time immortality is the most horrific of possible fates. Encoded in the earliest life of our cells, this fate is now reappearing on our horizons, so to speak, with the advent of cloning. (The death drive, according to Freud, is precisely this nos- talgia for a state before the appearance of individuality and sexual differentiation, a state in which we lived before we became mortal and distinct from one another. Absolute death is not the end of the individual human being; rather, it is a regression toward a state of minimal differentiation among living beings, of a pure repetition of identical beings.) The evolution of the biosphere is what drives immortal beings to become mortal ones. They move, little by little, the final solution 6 from the absolute continuity found in the subdivision of the same—in bacteria—toward the possibility of birth and death. Next, the egg becomes fertilized by a sperm and specialized sex cells make their appearance. The resulting entity is no longer a copy of either one of the pair that engendered it; rather, it is a new and singular combination. There is a shift from pure and simple reproduction to procreation: the first two will die for the first time, and the third for the first time will be born. We reach the stage of beings that are sexed, dif- ferentiated, and mortal. The earlier order of the virus—of immortal beings—is perpetuated, but henceforward this world of deathless things is contained inside the world of the mortals. In evolutionary terms, the victory goes to beings that are mortal and distinct from one another: the victory goes to us. But the game isn’t over yet, and reversion is always pos- sible. It can be found not only in the viral revolt of our cells but also in the enormous enterprise we living beings our- selves undertake today: a project to reconstruct a homoge- neous and uniformly consistent universe—an artificial con- tinuum this time—that unfolds within a technological and the final solution 7 mechanical medium, extending over our vast information network, where we are in the process of building a perfect clone, an identical copy of our world, a virtual artifact that opens up the prospect of endless reproduction. We are in the process of reactivating this pathological immortality, the immortality of the cancer cell, both at the individual level and at the level of the species as a whole. This is the revenge taken on mortal and sexed beings by immortal and undifferentiated life forms. This is what could be called the final solution. After the great revolution in the evolutionary process— the advent of sex and death—we have the great involution: it aims, through cloning and many other techniques, to lib- erate us from sex and death. Where once living creatures strove, over millions of years, to pull themselves free of this kind of incest and primitive entropy, we are now, through scientific advances themselves, in the process of recreating precisely these conditions. We are actively working at the “dis-information” of our species through the nullification of differences. Here we must pose the question of the destination of the the final solution 8 scientific project. We must consider the possibility that the very “progress” of science in fact does not follow a line, but a curve—a twisted or hairpin curve that turns back toward total involution. And we must ask if this final solution toward which we unconsciously work is not the secret des- tination of nature, as well as of all our efforts. This throws a fairly harsh light on everything we still, today, persist in regarding as a positive evolution, as a step forward.  The sexual revolution—the real one, the only one—is the advent of sexuality in the evolution of living things, of a duality that puts an end to perpetual indivision and succes- sive iterations of the same. In this, the sexual revolution is also the revolution of death. It is the revolution of death, as opposed to the infinite survival of the same. The inverse movement we are describing here is an involutionary move- ment of the species, a retreat from the revolution of sex and death, a massive revisionist movement in the evolution of living things. From this point of view, “sexual liberation” is thoroughly the final solution 9 ambivalent. Though sexual liberation seems at first to be in keeping with the sexual revolution of which it is the final, positive, and definitive moment, it seems, upon further analysis, to have ambiguous repercussions. In the end these repercussions may be completely opposed to the goals of the sexual revolution itself. The first phase of sexual liberation involves the dissocia- tion of sexual activity from procreation through the pill and other contraceptive devices—a transformation with enor- mous consequences. The second phase, which we are beginning to enter now, is the dissociation of reproduction from sex. First, sex was liberated from reproduction; today it is reproduction that is liberated from sex, through asexual, biotechnological modes of reproduction such as artificial insemination or full body cloning. This is also a liberation, though antithetical to the first. We’ve been sexually liber- ated, and now we will find ourselves liberated from sex— that is, virtually relieved of the sexual function. Among the clones (and among human beings soon enough), sex, as a result of this automatic means of reproduction, becomes extraneous, a useless function. Thus sexual liberation, the the final solution 10 so-called crowning achievement of the evolution of sexed forms of life, marks, in its final consequences, the end of the sexual revolution. It is the same ambiguity that troubles sci- ence. The calculated benefits both of sexual liberation and of the scientific revolution are inextricably bound up with with their negative countereffects. And death? Entwined as it is with sex, it must eventually suffer the same fate. There is, in effect, a liberation from death that parallels liberation from sex. As we have dissoci- ated reproduction from sex, so we try to dissociate life from death. To save and promote life and life only, and to render death an obsolete function one can do without, as, in the case of artificial reproduction, we can do without sex. So death, as a fatal or symbolic event, must be erased. Death must be included only as virtual reality, as an option or changeable setting in the living being’s operating system. This is a reprogramming that proceeds along the lines of the virtualization of sex, the “cybersex” that waits for us in the future, as a sort of ontological “attraction.” All these useless functions—sex, thought, death—will be redesigned, redesig- nated as leisure activities. And human beings, henceforth the final solution 11 useless, might themselves be preserved as a kind of onto- logical “attraction.” This could be another aspect of what Hegel has called the moving life of what is dead. Death, once a vital function, could thus become a luxury, a diver- sion. In future modes of civilization, from which death will have been eliminated, clones of the future may well pay for the luxury of dying and become mortal once again in simu- lation: cyberdeath. A sort of anticipation of cloning can be found in nature itself, in the phenomenon of twins and twinship (gemellité). We can perceive a kind of cloning in the hallucinatory redoubling of the same, in the primitive symmetry that makes the two twins seem to be like two halves of a single self, of the same individual—and we escape the phantasm only by way of a break, a rupture of the symmetry. But per- haps we have never properly escaped our double; and cloning, then, may simply be reviving this hallucination of the same, of the twin from whom we have never quite been separated. At the same time we may see in cloning the resur- gence of our fascination with an archaic form of incest with the original twin, and the grave psychotic consequences of the final solution 12 such a primitive fantasy (Cronenberg’s film Dead Ringers is a dramatic illustration of this). Most of the time this twinship remains obscure and sym- bolic, but whenever it materializes, it illuminates the mys- tery of the symbolic separation, of the invisible division found at the heart of each of us. (Indeed, there are some who claim to have discovered its biological trace.) From this internal division surely comes the sacred, or rather the accursed character of twinship in every culture. In our cul- ture, however, we also see the other side of this accursed- ness—the endless resentment and remorse associated with individuation. It is effectively only through this original sep- aration, this “ontological” cleavage from the twin, that the individual being first appears and, with it, the possibility of alterity and of a dual relation. And so we are individuated, and proud of it; but somewhere inside, in an unconscious still deeper than the psychological unconscious, we never overcome, we never fully accept this separation and this individuation. Is there not a terror of and a nostalgia for this double, and, to go further, for the whole multiplicity of semblables the final solution 13 from whom we have divided ourselves in the course of evo- lution? Do we not, after all, deeply regret our individua- tion? In effect, we have here a double repentance. Not only do we repent of the emancipation of the individual from the species but, more profoundly still, we repent of having become sexed forms of life, of our evolution from the inor- ganic to the living world. That is how it goes. Any given lib- eration, emancipation, or individuation is also experienced as anomie and as betrayal, in fact as the source of endless neurosis, a neurosis that becomes increasingly serious as one moves further away from the nostalgic point of origin. Liberty is hard to take. Life itself, finally, may be hard to take, as a rupturing of the inorganic chain of matter. In a way it is the revenge of the species, the revenge of the immortal forms of life that we thought we had overcome. In cloning—this collective fantasy of a return to a non- individuated existence and a destiny of undifferentiated life, this temptation to return to an indifferent immortality—we see the very form of a repentance of the living toward the unliving. This repentance arises from the depths of a past the final solution 14 time; we pine for a state that is long gone but that will be possible again by virtue of our technologies, becoming eventually an object of our fascination, our nostalgia, and our desire. This may well be the story of a deliberate project to put an end to the genetic game of difference, to stop the divaga- tions of the living. Aren’t we actually sick of sex, of differ- ence, of emancipation, of culture? The world of individuals and social relations itself offers striking examples of this exhaustion—or resistance—or nostalgic attachment to some prior state of being. In any case, we are dealing with a kind of revisionism, a crucial revision of the whole process of evolution and especially that of the human race—a species unable to brave its own diversity, its own complexity, its own radical difference, its own alterity. But perhaps we may see this as a kind of adventure, a heroic test: to take the artificialization of living beings as far as possible in order to see, finally, what part of human nature survives the great ordeal. If we discover that not everything can be cloned, simulated, programmed, geneti- cally and neurologically managed, then whatever survives the final solution 15 could truly be called “human”: some inalienable and inde- structible human quality could finally be identified. Of course, there is always the risk, in this experimental adven- ture, that nothing will pass the test—that the human will be permanently eradicated. Such was the lesson of Biosphere , the artificial synthe- sis of all the planet’s systems, the ideal copy of the human race and its environment. Biosphere  reveals in miniature the fact that the human race and the entire planet are already becoming their own virtual reality, that underneath its vast geodesic dome of information, the planet has already embarked on an experimental path from which there is no return. From this moment on it is possible to ask if we are still dealing with human beings. Is a species that succeeds in synthesizing its own immortality, and that seeks to transform itself into pure information, still particularly a human species? Humankind does not discriminate; it willingly becomes its own guinea pig under the same terms as the rest of the world, animate and inanimate. Humankind blithely plays with its own future as a species in the same way that it the final solution 16 plays with the future of all other creatures. In its blind quest to possess greater knowledge, humankind programs its own destruction with the same casual ferocity that it applies to the destruction of everything else. You could hardly accuse humanity of egocentrism. Humanity sacri- fices itself as a whole species to an unknown experimental fate—unknown before this, in any case, to other species, who have never known any fate but a natural one. And while this natural destiny would seem related to something like an instinct for self-preservation, the new experimental destiny to which the human race devotes itself sweeps away all instinct for self-preservation. The disappearance of this concept from the fields of research indicates that, behind the ecological obsession with protection and con- servation—which has much more to do with nostalgia and remorse—an entirely different inclination has taken over: the inclination to sacrifice the entire species to limitless experimentation. And so a double and contradictory movement: Human- kind, alone among all living things, tries to build itself a deathless alter ego and at the same time to perfect natural the final solution 17 selection through artificial selection—an act that confers on the human being an absolute privilege. Yet at the same time and precisely through this action, humankind puts an end to natural selection, a process that implies, according to the laws of evolution, the death of any given species— including its own. By ending natural selection, humankind contravenes symbolic law, and in so doing effectively risks its own disappearance. Not, this time, because of natural law, but by way of its detour. In their arrogant plan to bring evolution to an end, human beings set in motion the invo- lution of their own kind, which is in the process of losing its specificity, its very immunity. For the death rate of arti- ficial species is even more rapid than that of natural species. By taking an artificial course, our species may be running all the more quickly into its own decline. All this derives from a strange fact: apparently, the human race cannot bear itself, cannot bear to be reconciled to itself. Paralleling the violence it wreaks on other living things, there is a violence peculiar to humankind, wreaked by itself on itself. It is as if, through this self-inflicted vio- lence, humanity wants to make itself ready from now on to the final solution 18 be the survivor of some great impending catastrophe. As if, all the while being proud and convinced of its superiority, humankind nevertheless resents the evolutionary process that has elevated it to this privileged position and pushed it, in some fashion, beyond its natural limits as a species. The same configuration appears in Canetti’s description of our exit from history. In experimentation we find a simi- lar movement, but this time it is a passage out of the human per se, a passage even more fatal, a movement toward the point beyond which we can recognize neither human nor inhuman. Much like the point, in Canetti, beyond which the words “truth” and “falsehood” no longer have any meaning. Indeed, to push Canetti’s analysis further, the stakes are no longer only that “history” is slipping into the “posthistori- cal,” but that the human race is slipping into the void. Have we come, via an unexpected detour, to the same point at which animal species, when they reach a critical saturation point, automatically switch over to a kind of col- lective suicide? The inhumanity of this undertaking is legible in the abo- lition of all that is “human, all too human” in us: our desires, the final solution 19 our failings, our neuroses, our dreams, our handicaps, our viruses, our frenzies, our unconscious, and even our sexual- ity. Prescriptions are being placed on all the specific quali- ties that make us unique living beings. The specter that haunts genetic manipulation is the genetic ideal, a perfect model obtained through the elimination of all negative traits. In the experimental prototype Biosphere , for exam- ple, we find no viruses, no germs, no scorpions . . . and no sexual reproduction. Everything in Biosphere  has been purified, immunized—immortalized—through transparency, disincarnation, and prophylactic disinfection. Life becomes sheer survival when it is reduced to the lowest common denominator, to the genome, the genetic inheritance—where it is the perpetual movement of the DNA codes that drives life, and where the distinctive marks of the human fade before the metonymic eternity of cells. The worst of it is that living beings engendered by their own genetic formulae doubtless will not survive this process of reduction. That which lives and survives by the codes will die by them. The limits of the human and the inhuman are in the the final solution 20 process of being worn away—but the human does not give way to the superhuman, as Nietzsche had dreamed, with his transvaluation of values. Rather, it gives way to the subhu- man, to something not beyond but underneath the human, to an erasure of those symbolic marks that make up the species. A fact that proves that Nietzsche was right after all when he said the human race, left to its own devices, is capa- ble only of redoubling its efforts, of re-doubling itself—or of destroying itself.  Traditional humanism, that of the Enlightenment, was based on the qualities of man, on his natural gifts and virtues—on his essence, which went hand-in-hand with his right to liberty and the exercise of that liberty. Contempo- rary humanism, in its expanded version, is affiliated more and more with the preservation of the individual and of humankind as a genetically defined entity. When we look behind the Rights of Man, we no longer find a moral or sov- ereign being, but instead the prerogatives of an endangered species. Then these rights become problematic, for they the final solution 21 pose the question of the rights of other species, or of chil- dren, or of nature itself—in contrast to which the human species has to define itself. But is there even a genetic definition of the human? And if it does exist, does a species have rights to its own genome and to its own eventual genetic transformation? We share  percent of our genes with apes and fully  percent of them with mice. Based on this common inheritance, what rights shall revert to the apes and the mice? Furthermore, it appears that some  percent of the genes making up our genome serve no purpose at all. What right do these genes have to exist? This is a critical question: if we describe them as useless, we arrogate to ourselves the right to destroy them. The same thing goes for any given aspect of humanity itself: once the human is no longer defined in terms of tran- scendence and liberty, but in terms of functions and of bio- logical equilibrium, the definition of the human itself begins to fade, along with that of humanism. Occidental human- ism was already challenged by the irruption of other cul- tures as early as the sixteenth century. Now the assault is not the final solution 22 only against a particular culture but against the whole species: anthropological deregulation, along with the deregulation of all the moral, juridical, and symbolic codes that founded humanism. Is it possible to speak of the soul, or the conscience, or even of the unconscious from the point of view of the automatons, the chimeras, and the clones that will supersede the human race? Both the indi- vidual and the species’s capital are jeopardized by the ero- sion of the limits of the human, by the slide, not just into the inhuman but into something that is neither human nor inhuman: namely, the genetic simulation of life. The mutual interplay between human and inhuman—the balance between them—has been disrupted. Certainly the eventual disappearance of the human is very serious, but the loss of the inhuman is no less serious. The specificity of the inhuman—and of that within the human being that is, so to speak, inhuman—is being threatened by the hegemony of the human, according to its definition as thoroughly mod- ern, thoroughly rational, and thoroughly Western in char- acter. The impulse to annex nature, animals, other races and cultures—to put them universally under jurisdiction—is in the final solution 23 effect everywhere. Everything is assigned a place within an evolutionist and hegemonic anthropology, in a veritable tri- umph of uniform thought, of a monothought (une pensée unique) of the human—as defined by the West, under the sign of the universal and of democracy. The Rights of Man today are the vector of this anthropic, anthropocratic thought, behind which the human and the inhuman prolif- erate—in apparent contradiction but in actual complicity with one another. And so we now experience both the “improvement” of human rights and the recrudescence of their violation. Non-Occidental cultures do not discriminate between the human and the inhuman. We invented the distinction, and we are in the process of erasing it. Not by crossing the line and reconciling the two; rather, the erasure operates in absentia, through technological undifferentiation. Again: the final solution, the vertigo of a final solution. It might be argued that whatever the genetic destination of the clone may be, it will never be exactly the same as the original. (Well, of course not, as the clone will have had an Original, which cannot be said of the original itself.) But the the final solution 24 main argument is that there is nothing to fear from bio- genetically engineered cloning, because whatever happens, culture will continue to differentiate us. Salvation lies in our acquirements: culture alone will preserve us from the hell of the Same. In fact, exactly the reverse is true. It is culture that clones us, and mental cloning anticipates any biological cloning. It is the matrix of acquired traits that, today, clones us cultur- ally under the sign of monothought—and it is all the innate differences that are annulled, inexorably, by ideas, by ways of life, by the cultural context. Through school systems, media, culture, and mass information, singular beings become identical copies of one another. It is this kind of cloning—social cloning, the industrial reproduction of things and people—that makes possible the biological con- ception of the genome and of genetic cloning, which only further sanctions the cloning of human conduct and human cognition. All this radically alters the ethical questions surrounding the prescriptive limits on cloning and the rights of the indi- vidual facing scientific and technological experimenta- the final solution 25 tion—in short, everything that is currently being discussed by the ethics boards and the committees for collective moral thought. Yet beyond their political, ideological, and com- mercial purposes, the speculations of the committees are useless, since it is the culture of difference itself, our human- ist ethos itself, that works most efficiently in the direction of undifferentiation, of human Xerox copies, and of mono- thought. This new regime has at least some positive aspect, however, insofar as it offers us the chance to call into ques- tion the basic elements of millenarian morality. This matter of the clones, in fact, could call a number of things into question—and that is the irony of the situation. The clone, after all, could also appear as a grotesque parody of the original. It is not hard to imagine a whole range of potential problems and new conflicts issuing from cloning that would turn oedipal psychology upside down. Consider, for instance, a clone of the future overthrowing his father, not in order to sleep with his mother—which would be impossible, anyway, since she is nothing but a matrix of cells, and besides, the “father” could very well be a woman— but in order to secure his status as the Original. Or imagine, the final solution 26 instead, the disenfranchised original working his revenge on his clone . . . all sorts of conflicts that would no longer center on the child and his or her parents but on the origi- nal and its double. It is possible to imagine entirely new functions for clones, quite different from those assigned them today, which all hinge on the perpetuation of life. For instance, they could function as instruments for the satis- faction of the death instinct—as recipients of a death wish. Kill your clone, destroy yourself with no risk of actually dying: vicarious suicide. But our moralists and our biologists are not yet at this point; they have not yet discovered the operation of the death drive as a fundamental part of the human individual and of the human race. For just as there is a drive for immor- tality, to which techniques such as cloning respond, so there is a death drive. As we have seen, these drives are in play simultaneously, and it is possible that one is nothing but a variant of the other, nothing but its detour. The silver lining of this fatal enterprise is that it reveals to us something that radical philosophies already know: there is no morality to oppose to this immoral desire, this techno- the final solution 27 logical desire for immortality. There are no laws of nature and no moral law that would be their manifestation. The notion of such a law springs from an idealized vision of the world, one that is perpetuated, I would add, by science itself. There are no natural rights of the individual, or of the species, from the point of view of an ideal definition. Thus there is no interdiction that could be founded on a division between good and evil. There is, however, a different division. The stakes are not moral but symbolic. There are rules to the game of living, whose forms are secret, whose finality is inscrutable. Life “means” nothing, not even human life; if it is precious, it’s not as a value but as a form, a form that exceeds all individ- ual and collective value. Today, life is preserved insofar as it has value, that is, insofar as it has exchange value. But if life is precious, it is because it has no exchange value—because exchanging it for some ultimate value is impossible. The world is that which cannot be traded as currency for any other world, above all for a virtual world. The human is that which cannot be traded as currency for any given artificial species, such as clones, even if the clones perform better, are the final solution 28 a “better value.” A form—and life is a form—can only be exchanged with another form, never traded for an equiva- lent. There is a change from one form to another, but there is no way to exchange a form for a general equivalent. In this respect, the forms—the species, or life itself—obey no moral law but are vectors of a vital illusion. Thus it makes no sense to oppose the immortality of the Same, of repeti- tion, of the clone, of the virus, with a morality of values and differences; it is necessary to oppose immortality with the superior immorality of forms. And of thought, also—for thought is another thing that cannot be exchanged, either for some objective truth (as in science) or for an artificial double, such as artificial intelligence. Thought is singular, and in its singularity thought may be able to protect us. Thus, a double movement: first the reign of the immor- tals, then the mortal and sexed beings overtaking the immortals; Today, however, the immortals are silently avenging themselves through the processes of cloning, through interminable reduplication, through the oblitera- tion of sex and death. But this game is not yet over. We can count on fierce the final solution 29 resistance from the mortal creatures that we are, a resist- ance that springs out of the depths of the species, its vital exigency, its refusal of any final solution. This refusal is not a matter of human rights; it is a matter of life and death. the final solution 30 2  The Millennium, or The Suspense of the Year 2000 This page intentionally left blank How can we jump over our shadows when we no longer have any? How can we pass out of the old century (not to speak of the millennium) if we do not make up our minds to put an end to it, engaged as we are in an indefinite work of mourning for all the incidents, ideologies, and violence that have marked it? The—more or less hypocritical—commemo- rations and recantations give the impression that we are try- ing to run the events of the century back through the filter of memory, not in order to find a meaning for them—they have clearly lost that meaning somewhere along the way—but in order to whitewash them, or to launder them. Cleansing is the prime activity of this fin de siècle—the laundering of a dirty history, of dirty money, of corrupt consciousnesses, of the polluted planet—the cleansing of memory being indissol- ubly linked to the (hygienic) cleansing of the environment or to the (racial and ethnic) cleansing of populations. We are turning away from history “in progress,” with none of the problems it poses having been resolved, and plunging into a regressive history, in the nostalgic hope of making something politically correct out of it. And in this retrospective, necrospective obsession, we are losing any chance of things coming to their term. This is why I advanced the idea that the Year  would not take place—quite simply, because the history of this century had already come to an end, because we are remaking it interminably and because, therefore, metaphorically speaking, we shall never pass on, into the future. Our millenarianism—for we have reached, all the same, a millenarian deadline—is a millenarianism with no tomor- row. Whereas the coming of the Year , even though it was experienced with dread, was a prelude to parousia and to the advent of the Kingdom of God, and hence the prelude to an infinite promise, our own deadline remains a closed, invo- luted one. All we have left of the millenarian dateline is the countdown to it. A perfect symbol for the century—which could do nothing more than count the seconds separating it from its end—is the digital clock on the Beaubourg Center in Paris that showed the countdown in millions of seconds. It the millennium 34 illustrates the reversal of our modern relation to time. Time is no longer counted progressively, by addition, starting from an origin—but by subtraction, starting from the end. This is what happens with rocket launches and time bombs. And that end is no longer the symbolic endpoint of a history but the mark of a zero sum, of a potential exhaustion. Time is viewed from a perspective of entropy—the exhausting of all possibilities—the perspective of a counting down . . . to infin- ity. We no longer possess a forward-looking, historical, or providential vision, which was the vision of a world of progress or production. The final illusion of history, the final utopia of time no longer exists, since it is already registered there as something potentially accounted for, calculated in digital time, just as the finalities of the human cease to exist at the point where they come to be registered in a genetic cap- ital and are looked at solely from the biological perspective of the exploitation of the genome. When you count the sec- onds separating you from the end, it means that everything is already at an end, that moreover we are already beyond the end. By the way: something happened to this digital clock. It the millennium 35 was removed from the front of the Beaubourg, relegated to a storehouse at the Parc de la Villette without anyone knowing about it. For a long time it was there ticking in the dark—a very heavy symbol of the destiny of Time at the end of the twenti- eth century. Then it was displaced again to the Place de la Bastille (the story of the inventor and the EDF: time doesn’t work anymore). This is a truly illuminating emblem of YK’s failure to take place. Even the sign of it was removed in antic- ipation. It seems that no right place is to be found for the end. Was it for fear of this deadline? Growing anxiety about this deadline? Or did it mean, as we said, that this end had already occurred, secretly, furtively—perhaps at the very beginning of the countdown?—and that it now lay behind us? And then the registration of it would be useless. The same thing goes for the Apocalypse. The real event of the Apoca- lypse is behind us, among us, and we are instead confronted with the virtual reality of the Apocalypse, with the posthu- mous comedy of the Apocalypse. Maybe it was already the same with the first millennium, with the Apocalypse of YK. “The writers of the Apocalypse send letter after letter to one another, instead of questioning the Antichrist himself.” Then, the millennium 36 even they were already dealing with the virtual reality of the Apocalypse. In the countdown, the time remaining is already past, and the maximal utopia of life gives way to the minimal utopia of survival. We are experiencing time and history in a kind of deep coma. This is the hysteresis of the millennium, which expresses itself in interminable crisis. It is no longer the future that lies before us, but an anorectic dimension—the impossibility of anything’s being over and, at the same time, the impossibility of seeing beyond the present. Prediction, the memory of the future, diminishes in exact proportion to the memory of the past. When there is overall transparence, when everything can be seen, nothing can be foreseen any- more.  What is there beyond the end? Beyond the end extends vir- tual reality, the horizon of a programmed reality in which all our functions—memory, emotions, sexuality, intelligence— become progressively useless. Beyond the end, in the era of the transpolitical, the transsexual, the transaesthetic, all our the millennium 37 desiring machines become little spectacle machines, then quite simply bachelor machines, before trailing off into the countdown of the species. The countdown is the code of the automatic disappearance of the world, and all our little char- itable machines, by way of which we anticipate that disap- pearance—the Telethons, Sidathons, and all kinds of Thanathons—are merely the promotional sales events for the misery of this fin de siècle. But—and this is even more paradoxical—what are we to do when nothing really comes to an end anymore, that is to say, when nothing ever really takes place, since everything is already calculated, audited, and realized in advance (the simulacrum preceding the real, information preceding the event, etc.)? Our problem is no longer: What are we to make of real events, of real violence? Rather, it is: What are we to make of events that do not take place? Not: What are we to do after the orgy? But: What are we to do when the orgy no longer takes place—the orgy of history, the orgy of revolution and liberation, the orgy of modernity? Little by little, as the hands of the clock move around (though, sadly, digital clocks no longer even have hands), we tell ourselves that, taking the millennium 38 everything into account—taking everything into a “count- down”—modernity has never happened. There has never really been any modernity, never any real progress, never any assured liberation. The linear tension of modernity and progress has been broken, the thread of history has become tangled: the last great “historic” event—the fall of the Berlin Wall—signified something closer to an enormous repentance on the part of history. Instead of seeking fresh perspectives, history appears rather to be splintering into scattered frag- ments, and phases of events and conflicts we had thought long gone are being reactivated. All that we believed over and done, left behind by the inexorable march of universal progress, is not dead at all; it seems to be returning to strike at the heart of our ultra- sophisticated, ultravulnerable systems. It’s a bit like the last scene of Jurassic Park, in which the modern (artificially cloned) dinosaurs burst into the museum and wreak havoc on their fossilized ancestors preserved there, before being destroyed in their turn. Today we are caught as a species in a similar impasse, trapped between our fossils and our clones. So, the countdown extends in both directions: not only the millennium 39 does it put an end to time in the future but it also exhausts itself in the obsessional revival of the events of the past. A reversed recapitulation, which is the opposite of a living memory—it is fanatical memorization, a fascination with commemorations, rehabilitations, cultural museification, the listing of sites of memory, the extolling of heritage. In fact this obsession with reliving and reviving everything, this obsessional neurosis, this forcing of memory is equivalent to a vanishing of memory—a vanishing of actual history, a van- ishing of the event in the information space. This amounts to making the past itself into a clone, an artificial double, and freezing it in a sham exactitude that will never actually do it justice. But it is because we have nothing else, now, but objects in which not to believe, nothing but fossilized hopes, that we are forced to go down this road: to elevate everything to the status of a museum piece, an item of heritage. Here again, time reverses: instead of things first passing through history before becoming part of the heritage, they now pass directly into the heritage. Instead of first existing, works of art now go straight into the museum. Instead of being born and dying, beings are “born” as virtual fossils. Collective neuro- the millennium 40 sis. As a result, the ozone layer that was protecting memory becomes frayed; the hole through which memories and time are leaking out into space expands, prefiguring the great migration of the void to the periphery.  Closing down, closing down! It’s the end-of-the-century sale. Everything must go! Modernity is over (without ever having happened), the orgy is over, the party is over—the sales are starting. It’s the great end-of-the-century sale. But the sales don’t come after the festive seasons any longer; nowa- days the sales start first, they last the whole year long, even the festivals themselves are on sale everywhere. . . . The stocks have to be used up, time-capital has to be used up, life-capi- tal has to be used up. Everywhere, we have the countdown; what we are living through in this symbolic end of the old mil- lennium is a sort of fatal prescription, whether it be that of the planet’s resources or of AIDS, which has become the collec- tive symptom of the prescribed term of death. It is all these things that hang over us in the shadow of the Year , together with the delicious, yet terrifying enjoyment of the the millennium 41 lag time left to us. But, ultimately, perhaps the Year  will not have taken place? Perhaps, on the occasion of the Year , we are to be granted a general amnesty? The concept of countdown evokes once again Arthur C. Clarke’s “The Nine Billion Names of God.” A community of Tibetan monks has been engaged from time immemorial in listing and copying out the names of God, of which there are nine billion. At the end of this, the world will end. So runs the prophecy. But the monks are tired and, in order to hasten the work, they call in the experts at IBM, who come along with their computers and finish the job in a month. It is as if the operation of the virtual dimension were to bring the history of the world to an end in an instant. Unfortunately, this also means the disappearance of the world in real time, for the prophecy of the end of the world associated with this count- down of the names of God is fulfilled. As they go back down into the valley, the technicians, who did not actually believe the prophecy, see the stars vanishing from the firmament, one by one. This parable depicts our modern situation well: we have called in the IBM technicians and they have launched the the millennium 42 code of the world’s automatic disappearance. As a result of the intervention of all the digital, computing, and virtual- reality technologies, we are already beyond reality; things have already passed beyond their own ends. They cannot, therefore, come to an end any longer, and they sink into the interminable (interminable history, interminable politics, interminable crisis). And, in effect, we persevere, on the pretext of an increas- ingly sophisticated technology, in the endless deconstruc- tion of a world and of a history unable to transcend and com- plete itself. Everything is free to go on infinitely. We no longer have the means to end processes. They unfold without us now, beyond reality, so to speak, in an endless speculation, an exponential acceleration. But, as a result, they do so in an indifference that is also exponential. What is endless is also desire-less, tension-less, passionless; it is bereft of events. An anorectic history, no longer fueled by real incidents and exhausting itself in the countdown. Exactly the opposite of the end of history, then: the impossibility of finishing with history. If history can no longer reach its end, then it is, prop- erly speaking, no longer a history. We have lost history and the millennium 43 have also, as a result, lost the end of history. We are laboring under the illusion of the end, under the posthumous illusion of the end. And this is serious, for the end signifies that some- thing has really taken place. Whereas we, at the height of reality—and with information at its peak—no longer know whether anything has taken place or not. Perhaps the end of history, if we can actually conceive such a thing, is merely ironic? Perhaps it is merely an effect of the ruse of history, which consists in its having concealed the end from us, in its having ended without our noticing it. So that it is merely the end of history that is being fueled, whereas we believe we are continuing to make it. We are still awaiting its end, whereas that end has, in fact, already taken place. History’s ruse was to make us believe in its end, when it has, in fact, already started back in the opposite direction. Whether we speak of the end of history, the end of the political or the end of the social, what we are clearly deal- ing with is the end of the scene of the political, the end of the scene of the social, the end of the scene of history. In other words, in all these spheres, we are speaking of the advent of a specific era of obscenity. Obscenity may be characterized the millennium 44 as the endless, unbridled proliferation of the social, of the political, of information, of the economic, of the aesthetic, not to mention the sexual. Obesity is another of the figures of obscenity. As proliferation, as the saturation of a limitless space, obesity may stand as a general metaphor for our sys- tems of information, communication, production, and memory. Obesity and obscenity form the contrapuntal fig- ure for all our systems, which have been seized by some- thing of an Ubuesque distension. All our structures end up swelling like red giants that absorb everything in their expansion. Thus the social sphere, as it expands, absorbs the political sphere entirely. But the political sphere is itself obese and obscene—and yet at the same time it is becoming increasingly transparent. The more it distends, the more it virtually ceases to exist. When everything is political, that is the end of politics as destiny; it is the beginning of politics as culture and the immediate poverty of that cultural poli- tics. It is the same with the economic or the sexual spheres. As it dilates, each structure infiltrates and subsumes the oth- ers, before being absorbed in its turn. Such are the extreme phenomena: those that occur the millennium 45 beyond the end (extreme = ex terminis). They indicate that we have passed from growth (croissance) to outgrowth (ex- croissance), from movement and change to stasis, ek-stasis, and metastasis. They countersign the end, marking it by excess, hypertrophy, proliferation, and chain reaction; they reach critical mass, overstep the critical deadline, through potentiality and exponentiality. Ecstasy of the social: the masses. More social than the social. Ecstasy of the body: obesity. Fatter than fat. Ecstasy of information: simulation. Truer than true. Ecstasy of time: real time, instantaneity. More present than the present. Ecstasy of the real: the hyperreal. More real than the real. Ecstasy of sex: porn. More sexual than sex. Ecstasy of violence: terror. More violent than vio- lence. . . . All this describes, by a kind of potentiation, a raising to the second power, a pushing to the limit, a state of unconditional the millennium 46 realization, of total positivity (every negative sign raised to the second power produces a positive), from which all utopia, all death, and all negativity have been expunged. A state of ex-termination, cleansing of the negative, as corol- lary to all the other actual forms of purification and discrim- ination. Thus, freedom has been obliterated, liquidated by liberation; truth has been supplanted by verification; the community has been liquidated and absorbed by communi- cation; form gives way to information and performance. Everywhere we see a paradoxical logic: the idea is destroyed by its own realization, by its own excess. And in this way his- tory itself comes to an end, finds itself obliterated by the instantaneity and omnipresence of the event. This kind of acceleration by inertia, this exponentiality of extreme phenomena, produces a new kind of event: now we encounter strange, altered, random, and chaotic events that Historical Reason no longer recognizes as its own. Even if, by analogy with past events, we think we recognize them, they no longer have the same meaning. The same incidents (wars, ethnic conflicts, nationalisms, the unification of Europe) do not have the same meaning when they arise as the millennium 47 part of a history in progress as they do in the context of a his- tory in decline. Now, we find ourselves in a vanishing his- tory, and that is why they appear as ghost events to us. But is a ghost history, a spectral history, still a history? Not only have we lost utopia as an ideal end, but histor- ical time itself is also lost, in its continuity and its unfolding. Something like a short-circuit has occurred, a switch shift of the temporal dimension—effects preceding causes, ends preceding origins—and these have led to the paradox of achieved utopia. Now, achieved utopia puts paid to the utopian dimension. It creates an impossible situation, in the sense that it exhausts the possibilities. From this point on, the goal is no longer life transformed, which was the maxi- mal utopia, but rather life-as-survival, which is a kind of minimal utopia. So today, with the loss of utopias and ideologies, we lack objects of belief. But even worse, perhaps, we lack objects in which not to believe. For it is vital—maybe even more vital— to have things in which not to believe. Ironic objects, so to speak, dis-invested practices, ideas to believe or disbelieve as you like. Ideologies performed this ambiguous function the millennium 48 pretty well. All this is now jeopardized, vanishing progres- sively into extreme reality and extreme operationality. Other things are emerging: retrospective utopias, the revival of all earlier or archaic forms of what is, in a sense, a retrospective or necrospective history. For the disappear- ance of avant-gardes, those emblems of modernity, has not brought the disappearance of the rearguard as well. Just the opposite is true. In this process of general retroversion (was history perhaps infected with a retrovirus?), the rearguard finds itself in point position. Quite familiar by now is the parodic, palinodic event, the event Marx analyzed when he depicted Napoleon III as a grotesque copy of Napoleon I. In this second event—a cheap avatar of the original—we have a form of dilution, of historical entropy: history self-repeating becomes farce. The fake history presents itself as if it were advancing and continuing, when it is actually collapsing. The current period offers numerous examples of this debased, extenu- ated form of the primary events of modernity. Ghost- events, clone-events, faux-events, phantom-events—such as phantom limbs, those missing legs or arms that hurt the millennium 49 even when they are no longer there. Spectrality, of com- munism in particular. Events that are more or less ephemeral because they no longer have any resolution except in the media (where they have the “resolution” images do, where they are “resolved” in high definition)—they have no political resolution. We have a history that no longer consists of action, of acts, but instead culminates in a virtual acting-out; it retains a spec- tral air of déja-vu. Sarajevo is a fine example of this unreal history, in which all the participants were just standing by, unable to act. It is no longer an event, but rather the symbol of a specific impotence of history. Everywhere, virtuality— the media hyperspace and the hyperspace of discourses— develops in a way diametrically opposed to what one might call, if it still existed, the real movement of history.  In the past the virtual was intended to become actual: actu- ality was its destination. Today the function of the virtual is to proscribe the actual. Virtual history is here in place of real history; the information-replica stands for, stands in for, the the millennium 50 definitive absence of that real history. Hence our lack of responsibility—both individual and collective—since we are already, by virtue of information, beyond the event, which has not taken place. We might speak here of a kind of “event strike,” to use Macedonio Fernandez’s expression. What does this mean? That the work of history is over. That the work of mourning is beginning. That the system of information has been sub- stituted for that of history and is starting to produce events in the same way that Capital is starting to produce Work. Just as labor, under these circumstances, no longer has any significance of its own, the event produced by information has no historical meaning of its own. This is the point where we enter the transhistorical or transpolitical—that is to say, the sphere where events do not really take place precisely because they are produced and broadcast “in real time,” where they have no meaning because they can have all possible meanings. We have, therefore, to grasp them now not politically but transpoliti- cally—that is to say, at the point where they become lost in the void of information. The sphere of information is like a the millennium 51 space where, after events are deprived of their meaning, they receive an artificial gravity, where, after being flash- frozen politically and historically, they are restaged trans- politically, in real—that is to say, perfectly virtual—time. We might speak in the same way of the transeconomic sphere— in other words, the sphere where classical economics gets lost in the void of speculation, just as History gets lost in the void of information. But, in the end, perhaps we have to frame all these prob- lems in terms other than the obsolete ones of alienation and the fatal destiny of the subject. And it is precisely the Ubuesque side of this technological outgrowth, of this pro- liferating obscenity and obesity, of this unbridled virtuality, which induces us to do so. Our situation is a wholly pata- physical one—that is to say, everything around us has passed beyond its own limits, has moved beyond the laws of physics and metaphysics. Now, pataphysics is ironic, and the hypothesis that suggests itself here is that, at the same time that things have reached a state of paroxysm, they have also reached a state of parody. Might we advance the hypothesis—beyond the heroic the millennium 52 stage, beyond the critical stage—of an ironic stage of tech- nology, an ironic stage of history, an ironic stage of value? This would at last free us from the Heideggerian vision of technology as the effectuation and final stage of meta- physics; it would free us from all retrospective nostalgia for being, and we would have, instead, a gigantic, objectively ironic vision of the entire scientific and technological process that would not be too far removed from the radical snobbery, the post-historical Japanese snobbery Kojève spoke of. An ironic reversal of technology, similar to the irony of the media sphere. The common illusion about the media is that they are used by those in power to manipulate, seduce, and alienate the masses. A naive interpretation. The more subtle interpretation, the ironic one, is just the opposite. Through the media, it is the masses who manipulate those in power (or those who believe themselves to be). It is when the political powers think they have the masses where they want them that the masses impose their clandestine strategy of neutralization, of destabilization of a power that has become paraplegic. Finally undecidable; yet both hypothe- the millennium 53 ses are valid, for any interpretation of the media is reversible. It is precisely in this reversibility that the objec- tive irony lies. Let us put the same hypothesis regarding the object of science—of the most sophisticated of current sciences. Through the most subtle procedures we deploy to capture it, isn’t the scientific object itself playing with us, presenting itself as an object and mocking our objective pretension to analyze it? Scientists are not far from admitting this point today, and this irony of the object is the very form of a radi- cal illusion of the world—an illusion no longer physical (illu- sion of the senses) or metaphysical (illusion of the mind) but pataphysical, in the sense Jarry gave the word when he spoke of pataphysics as “the science of imaginary solu- tions.” And we can extend the hypothesis to all our technolo- gies, to the technical universe in general. It is becoming the ironic instrument of a world that we only imagine is ours to transform and dominate. It is the world, it is the object itself, that asserts itself, makes itself felt through all the interpos- ing technologies—a process in which we are merely opera- the millennium 54 tors. Here again, we see the form of the illusion. Illusion, not error (we are not wrong about technology—there is no human fatality about technology, as is often pretended): the illusion is not an error or deception but a game, a big game whose rules we just don’t know and perhaps will never know. Since the ironic hypothesis—that of a transcendental irony of the technological—is by definition unverifiable, let us take it as undecidable. We are in fact faced with two incompatible hypotheses: that of the perfect crime or, in other words, of the extermination by technology and virtu- ality of all reality—or that of the ironic game of technology, of an ironic destiny of all science and all knowledge by which the world, and the illusion of the world, are saved and perpetuated. Let us take up both of these irreconcilable and simultaneously “true” perspectives. Nothing allows us to decide between them. “The world is everything which is the case,” as Wittgenstein says. In the Critique of Political Economy, Marx writes: “Therefore mankind always sets itself only such tasks as it can solve; since, looking at the matter more closely, it will the millennium 55 always be found that the task itself arises only when the material conditions for its solution already exist or are at least in the process of formation.” But this no longer holds— precisely because of our world’s precipitation into the vir- tual, which overturns all those “material conditions” Marx was talking about and overturns all those historical condi- tions that would make it possible to resolve the problems dialectically. The virtual is a form of final solution of history and of all real conflicts. It succeeds so well that today, humanity (or those who would think for humanity) will only set itself problems when they have already been virtu- ally overcome or once the system has successfully displaced and absorbed them. But was this not already the case in the time of Marx? The emergence of the concept of class, and of class struggle, the emergence of the idea of class con- sciousness marks the moment when class begins progres- sively to lose its violent, irreducible character. Likewise, if Foucault can analyze power, it is because power no longer has a definition that can be properly called political; it has already become in some sense a lost object. When ethnol- ogy turns its attention to primitive societies, it is the sign that the millennium 56 they are in the process of disappearing—and what is more, the analyses themselves help to speed their disappearance. Critical consciousness, thought in general, perhaps, always comes after the fact, a day too late, like Kafka’s Mes- siah—or it comes at the close of the day, like Hegel’s owl. It is nothing but retrospective prophecy, or some platonic shadow dancing on the wall of events, in the cavern of his- tory. “If I speak of time,” Queneau wrote, “it is because we are already out of time.” History doesn’t offer a second seating (L’histoire ne repasse pas les plats)—only critique does. Is there space for another kind of thought? An other thought—a paradoxical thought that would, in an inversion of the words of Marx, pose only insoluble, definitively insol- uble problems? The material conditions for the resolution of such problems are nowhere to be found and never will be found. Is there room for a kind of thought that would instead reproblematize all the old solutions and help to hold the world in enigmatic tension? No one is certain. This may be the risk thought has to take: it must risk falling vic- tim to its own prophecies, just as history risks getting caught in its own snare. the millennium 57 This page intentionally left blank 3  The Murder of the Real This page intentionally left blank Murder of the Real: it sounds like Nietzsche pro- claiming the death of God. But this murder of God was a symbolic one, and it was going to change our destiny. We are still living, metaphysically living off this original crime, as survivors of God. But the Perfect Crime no longer involves God, but Reality, and it is not a symbolic murder but an extermination. This does not mean what it meant in the Nazi extermina- tion camps. There it was physical and radical. Here it is both more literal and more metaphorical. “Ex-terminis”: it means that all things (and all beings as well) pass beyond their own end, beyond their own finality, where there is no reality any- more, nor any reason for being, nor any determination (that is why I call it “ex-termination”). Extermination means that nothing is left, no trace, not even a corpse. The corps(e) of the Real—if there is any—has not been recovered, is nowhere to be found. And this because the Real is not just dead (as God is), it has purely and simply disappeared. In our virtual world, the question of the Real, of the referent, of the subject and its object, can no longer even be posed. I would refer, again, to Elias Canetti, when he writes: As of a certain point, history was no longer real. With- out noticing it, all mankind suddenly left reality: everything happening since then was supposedly not true; but we supposedly didn’t notice. Our task would now be to find that point, and as long as we didn’t have it, we would be forced to abide in our present destruc- tion. What could be said about this blind point of reversal, where nothing is either true or false any longer and every- thing is drifting indifferently between cause and effect, between origin and finality? Is it reversible or irreversible? Can we return to the point where the line of history was bro- ken and we were projected to the other side of the mirror? Can we survive the Metastases of the Real as we survived the Death of God? Are we dedicated to survival, or to revival? I would like to give an answer, but promises of the the murder of the real 62 future go the same way as memories of the past: they vanish with the very principle of reality. For reality is but a concept, or a principle, and by reality I mean the whole system of values connected with this prin- ciple. The Real as such implies an origin, an end, a past and a future, a chain of causes and effects, a continuity and a rationality. No real without these elements, without an objective configuration of discourse. And its disappearing is the dislocation of this whole constellation. Of course, I anticipate a little. In fact, this perfect exter- mination could only be achieved if the process of virtual- ization were fully realized. This is not the case, fortunately: as in the best detective novels, the crime is never perfect. Some traces can still be found. We live as if inside Borges’s fable of the map and the territory; in this story nothing is left but pieces of the map scattered throughout the empty space of the territory. Except that we must turn the tale upside down: today there is nothing left but a map (the virtual abstraction of the territory), and on this map some frag- ments of the real are still floating and drifting. No corpse—no victim either! As for the presumed perpe- the murder of the real 63 trator of this Perfect Crime, it’s a total mystery: it can be imputed to anyone. No suspect can be identified, not even the weapon—I would say that the weapon used in the crime is the crime itself. Nobody, no class, no group, no subject can be charged with responsibility for this radical actualization of things, of this unconditional hyperrealization of the real. In other words, it is as if all people were murderers and vic- tims simultaneously, reversibly, the two possibilities joined in a kind of Moebius strip. This perverted effect of irrespon- sibility is a specific aspect of the Perfect Crime. The process itself seems to be irreversible, for it is the very process of rationalization—what we proudly call progress and moder- nity and liberation—becoming exponential and chaotic. As for knowing why we go on irreversibly toward this deadline, all we can do is grasp at fantastic hypotheses such as this one: the human species could be dedicating itself to a sort of automatic writing of the world, to an automated and operationalized virtual reality, where human beings as such have no reason for existing anymore. Human subjec- tivity becomes a set of useless functions, as useless as sexu- ality is to clones. More generally, all traditional functions— the murder of the real 64 the critical, the political, the sexual, the social functions— become useless in a virtual world. Or they survive only in simulation, like bodybuilding in a disincarnated culture, as mock functions or alibis. We seem to be driven by a huge and irresistible compulsion that acts on us through the very progress of our technologies (expanding for example in what we call “information highways” and could as well call “disinformation highways”)—a compulsion to draw ever closer to the unconditional realization of the real. In virtual reality, absolute transparence converges with absolute simultaneity. This short circuit and instantaneity of all things in global information we call “real time.” Real time can be seen as a Perfect Crime perpetrated against time itself: for with the ubiquity and instant availability of the totality of information, time reaches its point of perfection, which is also its vanishing point. Because of course a perfect time has no memory and no future.  Let us be clear about this: if the Real is disappearing, it is not because of a lack of it—on the contrary, there is too much of the murder of the real 65 it. It is the excess of reality that puts an end to reality, just as the excess of information puts an end to information, or the excess of communication puts an end to communication. We are no longer dealing with a problematic of lack and alienation, where the referent of the self and the dialectic between subject and object were always to be found, sup- porting strong and active philosophical positions. The last and most radical analysis of this problematic was achieved by Guy Debord and the Situationists, with their concept of spectacle and spectacular alienation. For Debord there was still a chance of disalienation, a chance for the subject to recover his or her autonomy and sovereignty. But now this radical Situationist critique is over. By shifting to a virtual world, we go beyond alienation, into a state of radical dep- rivation of the Other, or indeed of any otherness, alterity, or negativity. We move into a world where everything that exists only as idea, dream, fantasy, utopia will be eradicated, because it will immediately be realized, operationalized. Nothing will survive as an idea or a concept. You will not even have time enough to imagine. Events, real events, will not even have time to take place. Everything will be pre- the murder of the real 66 ceded by its virtual realization. We are dealing with an attempt to construct an entirely positive world, a perfect world, expurgated of every illusion, of every sort of evil and negativity, exempt from death itself. This pure, absolute reality, this unconditional realization of the world—this is what I call the Perfect Crime. This means a crucial mutation from a critical state to a catastrophic one. The real and historical world, with its mass of tensions and contradictions, has always been in cri- sis. But the state of catastrophe is another thing. It does not mean apocalypse, or annihilation; it means the irruption of something anomalic, which functions according to rules and forms we do not and may never understand. The situa- tion is not simply contradictory or irrational—it is paradox- ical. Beyond the end, beyond all finality, we enter a para- doxical state—the state of too much reality, too much posi- tivity, too much information. In this state of paradox, faced with extreme phenomena, we do not know exactly what is taking place. In any case we cannot trust in traditional values or in the rehabilitation of reality. After all, it may be that humankind, the murder of the real 67 through an enigmatic compulsion, is intimately involved in this catastrophic process and so is doomed to disappear. If this is the case, it would be better by far to treat our disap- pearance as an art form—to exercise it, to perform it, to cre- ate an art of disappearance. Better than the alternative, which would be to vanish without a trace, without even the spectacle of our destruction. To challenge and to cope with this paradoxical state of things, we need a paradoxical way of thinking; since the world drifts into delirium, we must adopt a delirious point of view. We must no longer assume any principle of truth, of causality, or any discursive norm. Instead, we must grant both the poetic singularity of events and the radical uncer- tainty of events. It is not easy. We usually think that holding to the protocols of experimentation and verification is the most difficult thing. But in fact the most difficult thing is to renounce the truth and the possibility of verification, to remain as long as possible on the enigmatic, ambivalent, and reversible side of thought. Truth no longer affords a solution. But perhaps we can aim at a poetic resolution of the world, of the kind promised the murder of the real 68 by history or by language. The actual status of human lan- guage today is illuminating. Our common language tries, by discursive means, to inscribe reality in a meaning, in a form of reciprocal exchange. But today language is confronted by the hegemonic fantasy of a global and perpetual communi- cation—the New Order, the new cyberspace of language— where the ultrasimplification of digital languages prevails over the figural complexity of natural languages. With binary coding and decoding the symbolic dimension of lan- guage is lost; the materiality, the multiplicity, and the magic of language are erased. At the extreme limit of computation and the coding and cloning of human thought (artificial intelligence), language as a medium of symbolic exchange becomes a definitively useless function. For the first time in history we face the possibility of a Perfect Crime against lan- guage, an aphanisis of the symbolic function. But a contrario—the crime is never perfect—we must say that the strongest resistance to this destructive virtualiza- tion comes from language itself, from the singularity, the irreducibility, the vernacularity of all languages, which are actually very much alive and which are proving to be the the murder of the real 69 best deterrent against the global extermination of meaning. So the game is not over, but no one can say who will have the last word. More generally speaking, the world and its double cannot occupy the same space, for the double is a perfect artificial and virtual substitute for the world. Con- flict between them is inevitable.  Now we come to the crucial point. For even as I spoke of the extermination of the Real, I meant, in fact, the more funda- mental extermination of the Illusion. But we must be clear about this concept before we go further. I don’t mean illu- sion in the pejorative sense, the negative and irrational con- cept of illusion as fallacy, fantasmagory, and evil—the illu- sion whose sole destiny is to be rectified. I mean the radical and objective illusion of the world, the radical impossibility of a real presence of things or beings, their definitive absence from themselves. For nothing is identical to itself. We are never identical to ourselves, except, perhaps, in sleep and in death. Language itself never signifies what it means; it always signifies some- the murder of the real 70 thing else, through this very irreducible, ontological absence from itself. The probability, in this world, of a total identification, of a total adequation of the same to the same, is equal to zero. Fortunately. For that would be the Perfect Crime—a crime that never happens. In relations between things there is always a hiatus, a distortion, a rift that pre- cludes any reduction of the same to the same. That is even more true for human beings. We are never exactly present to ourselves, or to others. Thus we are not exactly real for one another, nor are we quite real even to ourselves. And this radical alterity is our best chance—our best chance of attracting and being attracted to others, of seducing and being seduced. Put simply, our chance at life. This concept of radical illusion has analogues in cosmol- ogy. Everyone knows that the light of the stars needs a very long time to reach us; sometimes we perceive it after the star itself has disappeared. This gap between the star as a virtual source and its perception by us, this non-simultaneity, is an inescapable part of the illusion of the world, the absence at the heart of the world that constitutes the illusion. And again, this distortion is beneficial. For the simultaneous per- the murder of the real 71 ception of the light of all the stars would be equivalent to an absolute daylight, and this would be unbearable for us. All the energy of life proceeds from this vital alternation of day and night, and more generally, from this vital mediation. Illusion is the general rule of the universe; reality is but an exception. If the same were identical to the same, we would be faced with an absolute reality, with the unconditional truth of things. But absolute truth is the other name for death. Fortunately, I do not know of any theory or intellec- tual construction that could—with its commitment to “unconditional truth”—destroy this fantastic material and vital illusion. We can also find traces of the illusion in the history of the formation of the universe after the Big Bang. The moment it happened, a gigantic cooling-off began; as a result, the uni- verse came into being with the generation of matter and antimatter. Very soon after that, matter separated off from antimatter and gradually evolved into the universe with which we are familiar. Thus the materiality of the world is a restricted one, expurgated of antimatter. Which, volatilized, forms a kind of invisible parallel world, an anti-universe, the murder of the real 72 about which we know almost nothing but on which astro- physics is focusing a great deal of attention. Illusion, or the Mirror of Illusion, is an appropriate name for this invisible, powerful antisubstance, whose interaction with our world would mean an annihilation of matter in the production of pure light. Reality would be obliterated in the clash, matter lost in the chasm with its counterpart . . . . What is striking about this is that our reality, our “objec- tive” reality, is the result of the amputation of antimatter. This restricted and limited form of matter is what we call reality. I find it at least on the symbolic level both enigmatic and ironic that our reality, born of a radical simplification of the cosmos, has no truth value anymore—divested of its counterpart, its dark half, our world is a definitive illusion. That this our real world, this restricted materiality, obeys precise physical laws, is not enough to make it true, since this relative coherence is only the paradoxical consequence of this “ontological” simplification. Besides, this matter without antimatter becomes the field of the whole process of entropy and involution, according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Because of this rupture of symmetry, the the murder of the real 73 destiny of matter, denuded of antimatter, is attrition. Our task, today, is to delocalize these hypotheses about the uni- verse and to redeploy them at a higher level, where they might challenge our principles of reality and relationality. Of course, I am well aware that all this is metaphorical. But we are not interested in generating one more truth. We are trying to recover the traces of the illusion, that is to say, the vestiges of the original crime against negativity that started with the elimination of antimatter. Against the extermination of evil, of death, of illusion, against this Per- fect Crime, we must fight for the criminal imperfection of the world. Against this artificial paradise of technicity and virtuality, against the attempt to build a world completely positive, rational, and true, we must save the traces of the illusory world’s definitive opacity and mystery. But are we ready to play the paradoxical, catastrophic, and ironic game that this radical illusion seems to propose? It would mean a drastic revision not only of the principle of reality but also of the principle of knowledge. “Knowledge” normally implies a dialectic between subject and object, a field of representation where the subject is master of the the murder of the real 74 game, since the subject constructed the frame of represen- tation and projected it into the world. This presupposes the privilege of the subject and the concomitant inferior status of the object, including the scientific object. But knowledge rules over truth and causal relations, not over appearance or illusion. In the domain of the illusion, knowledge is no longer logically possible, for its principles and postulates cannot function. And this is not just a metaphysical insight: today the microsciences stand at the point where the object as such no longer exists. It vanishes, it escapes, it has no def- inite status, it only appears in the form of ephemeral and aleatory traces on the screens of virtualization. At their outer edge the most advanced sciences can only verify the object’s disappearance. In other words, they can only verify the way the object plays with its own objectivity. This is the object’s perverse strategy; perhaps it is a form of revenge. Apparently, the object is a trickster, foiling all the protocols of the subject’s experiment, so that the subject itself loses its position as subject. Science has got it wrong. It is true that, thanks to the progress of analsyis and technique, we actually discover the the murder of the real 75 world in all its complexity—its atoms, particles, molecules, viruses. But never has science postulated, even as science fiction, that things discover us at the same time that we dis- cover them, according to an inexorable reversibility. We always thought that things were passively waiting to be dis- covered, in much the same way that America is imagined to have been waiting for Columbus. But it is not so. At the moment when the subject discovers the object—whether it is an “Indian” or a virus—the object makes a reversible, but never innocent, discovery of the subject. More—it is actually a sort of invention of the subject by the invented object. Knowledge, defined conventionally, always proceeds in the same direction, from the subject to the object. But today processes of reversion are emerging everywhere—in areas from anthropology to viral pathology. It is as if we had torn the object from its opaque and inoffensive stillness, from its indifference, from the deep secret where it was asleep. Today the object wakes up and reacts, determined to keep its secret alive. This duel engaged in by the subject and the object means the loss of the subject’s hegemonic position: the object becomes the horizon of the subject’s disappear- the murder of the real 76 ance. Obviously, this new scenario, this new dramaturgy, is opposed to the classic theory of knowledge. In this light, reality itself becomes problematic. Like an obsequious servant, it obeys any hypothesis, verifying them all in turn, even when they contradict each other. Reality does not care about the knowledge we are distilling from our observation and analysis of its behavior. Indifferent to every truth, reality becomes a sort of sphinx, enigmatic in its hyperconformity, simulating itself as virtuality or reality show. Reality becomes hyperreality—paroxysm and parody all at once. It supports all sorts of interpretations because it no longer makes sense, because it no longer wants to be interpreted. But this unintelligibility is not mystical or romantic: it is ironic. Irony is the last sign that comes from the secret core of the object, the modern allegory of the reversibility of all things. Here again, it is not the question of a subjective, critical irony but of an objective irony linked to the radical material illusion of the world and its unexpected effects. Things have become so accelerated that processes are no longer inscribed in a linear temporality, in a linear unfolding of his- the murder of the real 77 tory. Nothing moves any longer from cause to effect: every- thing is transversalized by inversions of meaning, by per- verse events, by ironic reversals. Acceleration, streams and turbulences, self-potentialization and chaotic effects. And this deregulation of the system is actually the work of the system itself (just as Marx said of the proletariat, that its emancipation would be the work of the proletarians them- selves: ironically, the formula also applies to the self-anni- hilating system). Pushed to extremes of sophistication and performance, to a point of perfection and totalization (as is the virtual system of nets and information), the system reaches its breaking point and implodes all by itself. This does not occur through the actions of any critical subject or any historical forces of subversion: it occurs through ultra- realization and automatic reversal, pure and simple. This is what I call objective irony: there is a strong prob- ability, verging on a certainty, that systems will be undone by their own systematicity. This is true not only for techni- cal structures but for human ones as well. The more these political, social, economic systems advance toward their own perfection, the more they deconstruct themselves. This the murder of the real 78 is very clear in the field of media and multimedia, where, because of an excess of information, we have lost access to real information and real historical events. But this logic is at work in religious, sexual, and productive fields as well. And even at a scientific level: the more the object is perse- cuted by experimental procedures, the more it invents strategies of counterfeit, evasion, disguise, disappearance. It is like a virus; it escapes by endlessly inventing counter- strategies. This behavior of the object is also ironic insofar as it breaks the foolish pretensions of the subject, its desire to impose laws and dispose of the world according to its own will, its own representations. Today the world itself engages in dissidence, disobeying, in its paradoxicality, even the laws of physics (very different from the human transgression of human laws, which lacks the irony implicit in the dissidence of the object). I won’t transform the object into a supersubject. But it would seem that something has escaped us. Definitively. This is not because our science and technologies are not advanced enough; on the contrary. The closer we come, through experimentation, to the object, the more it steals the murder of the real 79 away from us and finally becomes undecidable. And do not ask where it has gone. Simply, the object is what escapes the subject—more we cannot say, since our position is still that of the subject and of rational discourse. At any rate, we can- not rely on the pretext of an insufficient development of the scientific, intellectual or mental apparatus. The apparatus has given all that it can give; it has even passed beyond its own definitions of rationality. I cannot tell you exactly, in seconds, the decimal point of Planck’s constant beyond which there will be no further possible knowledge of the cosmos, because light does not exist, and accurate repre- sentation is impossible. It is the event horizon, as they say in physics, beyond which nothing makes sense and nothing at all may be discovered. That, if there is any, is the secret of the universe. As a metaphor, I would say that at the core of every human being and every thing there is such a fundamentally inaccessible secret. That is the vital illusion of which Nietzsche spoke, the glass wall of truth and illusion. From our rational point of view, this may appear rather desperate and could even justify something like pessimism. But from the point of view the murder of the real 80 of singularity, of alterity, of secret and seduction, it is, on the contrary, our only chance: our last chance. In this sense, the Perfect Crime is an hypothesis of radiant optimism. Of course, it is a matter of tragic optimism, as it is expressed in the famous line of Hölderlin: “But where dan- ger is, grows the saving power also” (Wo die Gefahr wächst, wächst das Rettende auch). It applies today—with the caveat that, as the evil genius of modernity has changed our destiny, Hölderlin’s phrase must be reversed: the more the saving power grows, the greater the danger. For we are no longer victims of an excess of fate and danger, of illusion and death. We are victims of an absence of destiny, of a lack of illusion, and consequently of an excess of reality, security, and efficiency. What hangs over us is the excess of protec- tion and positivity—the unconditional “saving” performed by our technologies. But it seems that something resists this irresistible trend, something irreducible. And here we might quote, as a counterpart to Hölderlin’s phrase, this very mys- terious sentence by Heidegger: “When we look into the ambiguous essence of technology, we behold the constella- tion, the stellar course of the mystery.” the murder of the real 81 This sentence is quite enigmatic, since it seems to con- tradict Heidegger’s interpretation of technology as “nega- tive ontology,” as a loss of being, as a definitive unveiling of the secret of the universe, as a disenchanted inspection, an “arraisonnement” (Gestell) of the world, in short, as the Perfect Crime itself. The alternative would be that, at the extreme horizon of technology, something else happens, another game, with other rules. The point is that the con- stellation of the secret still resists, remains alive. Either we think of technology as the exterminator of Being, the exter- minator of the secret, of seduction and appearances, or we imagine that technology, by way of an ironic reversibility, might be an immense detour toward the radical illusion of the world. A massive “clinamen,” a hidden strategy moving behind all our techniques and practices, an absolutely unpredictable movement that would finally bring us to the other side of metaphysics. We might then, through this detour, break through the mirror of technology—contra Heidegger, for whom technology is still the absolute achievement of metaphysics. Technology as delusion, tech- nology as definitive illusion. the murder of the real 82 But we cannot be certain about this virtual end of things. There is no way to choose between these alternative hypotheses, and we must be aware that at the end of all pos- sible theory, we shall have to deal with two antinomic even- tualities—and that this fatal situation will never be resolved. Here, however, lies the task of any philosophical thought: to go to the limit of hypotheses and processes, even if they are catastrophic. The only justification for thinking and writing is that it accelerates these terminal processes. Here, beyond the discourse of truth, resides the poetic and enigmatic value of thinking. For, facing a world that is unin- telligible and problematic, our task is clear: we must make that world even more unintelligible, even more enigmatic. the murder of the real 83 This page intentionally left blank 
